
"That's just the letter of it," returned Charlotte, scornfully. "Do you suppose he could cheat himself that way, or I'd have him if he could? When Barney Thayer went out of this house last night, and said what he did, he meant that it was all over, that he was never going to marry me, nor have anything more to do with us, and he's going to stand by it. I am not finding any fault with him. I've made up my mind that it's all over, and I'm going to pack away my weddin' things." 

"Oh, Charlotte, you take it so calm!" 

"What do you want me to do?" 

"If it was anybody else, I should think they didn't care." 

"Maybe I don't." 

"I couldn't bear it so, anyhow! I couldn't!" Rose cried out, with sudden passion. "I wouldn't bear it. I'd go down on my knees to him to come back!" Rose flung back her head and looked at Charlotte with a curious defiance; her face grew suddenly intense, and seemed to open out into bloom and color like a flower. The pupils of her blue eyes dilated until they looked black; her thin lips looked full and red; her cheeks were flaming; her slender chest heaved. "I would," said she; "I don't care, I would." 

Charlotte looked at her, and a quivering flush like a reflection was left on her fair, steady face. 

"I would," said Rose again. 

"It wouldn't do any good." 

"It would if he cared anything about you." 

"It would if he could give up to the care. Barney Thayer has got a terrible will that won't always let him do what he wants to himself." 

"I don't believe he's enough of a fool to put his own eyes out." 

"You don't know him." 

"I'd try, anyway." 

"It wouldn't do any good." 

"I don't believe you care anything about him, Charlotte Barnard!" Rose cried out. "If you did, you couldn't give him up so easy for such a silly thing. You sit there just as calm. I don't believe but what you'll have another fellow on the string in a month. I know one that's dying to get you." 

"Maybe I shall," replied Charlotte. 

"Won't you, now?" Rose tried to speak archly, but her eyes were fiercely eager. 

"I can't tell till I get home from the grave," said Charlotte. "You might wait till I did, Rose." She got up and went to dusting her bureau and the little gilt-framed mirror behind it. Her lips were shut tightly, and she never looked at her cousin. 

"Now don't get mad, Charlotte," Rose said. "Maybe I ought not to have spoken so, but it did seem to me you couldn't care as _much_-- It does seem to me I couldn't settle down and be so calm if I was in your place, and all ready to be married to anybody. I should want to do something." 

"I should, if there was anything to do," said Charlotte. She stopped dusting and leaned against the wall, reflecting. "I wish it was a real mountain to move," said she; "I'd do it." 

"I'd go right down in the field where he is ploughing, and I'd make him say he'd come to see me to-night." 

"I called him back last night--you heard me," said Charlotte, with slow bitterness. Her square delicate chin dipped into the muslin folds of her neckerchief; she looked steadily at the floor and bent her brow. 

"I'd call him again." 

"You would, would you?" cried Charlotte, straightening herself. "You would stand out in the road and keep on calling a man who wouldn't even turn his head? You'd keep on calling, and let all the town hear?" 

"Yes, I would. I would! I wouldn't be ashamed of anything if I was going to marry him. I'd go on my knees before him in the face and eyes of the whole town." 

"Well, I wouldn't," said Charlotte. 

"I would, if I was sure he thought as much of me as I did of him." 

Charlotte looked at her proudly. "I'm sure enough of that," said she. 

Rose winced a little. "Then I wouldn't mind what I did," she persisted, stubbornly. 

"Well, I would," said Charlotte; "but maybe I don't care. Maybe all this isn't as hard for me as it would be for another girl." Charlotte's voice broke, but she tossed her head back with a proud motion; she took up the dusting-cloth and fell to work again. 

"Oh, Charlotte!" said Rose; "I didn't mean that. Of course I know you care. It's awful. It was only because I didn't see how you could seem so calm; it ain't like me. Of course I know you feel bad enough underneath. Your wedding-clothes all done and everything. They are pretty near all done, ain't they, Charlotte?" 

"Yes," said Charlotte. "They're--pretty near--done." She tried to speak steadily, but her voice failed. Suddenly she threw herself on the bed and hid her face, and her whole body heaved and twisted with great sobs. 

"Oh, poor Charlotte, don't!" Rose cried, wringing her own hands; her face quivered, but she did not weep. 

"Maybe I don't care," sobbed Charlotte; "maybe--I don't care." 

"Oh, Charlotte!" Rose looked at Charlotte's piteous girlish shoulders shaken with sobs, and the fair prostrate girlish head. Charlotte all drawn up in this little heap upon the bed looked very young and helpless. All her womanly stateliness, which made her seem so superior to Rose, had vanished. Rose pulled her chair close to the bed, sat down, and laid her little thin hand on Charlotte's arm, and Charlotte directly felt it hot through her sleeve. "Don't, Charlotte," Rose said; "I'm sorry I spoke so." 

"Maybe I don't care," Charlotte sobbed out again. "Maybe I don't." 

"Oh, Charlotte, I'm sorry," Rose said, trembling. "I do know you care; don't you feel so bad because I said that." 

Rose tightened her grasp on Charlotte's arm; her voice changed suddenly. "Look here, Charlotte," said she, "I'll do anything in the world I can to help you; I promise you that, and I mean it, honest." 

Charlotte reached around a hand, and clasped her cousin's. 

"I'm sorry I spoke so," Rose said. 

"Never mind," Charlotte responded, chokingly. She sobbed a little longer from pure inertia of grief; then she raised herself, shaking off Rose's hand. "It's all right," said she; "I needn't have minded; I know you didn't mean anything. It was just--the last straw, and--when you said that about my wedding-clothes--" 

"Oh, Charlotte, you did speak about them yourself first," Rose said, deprecatingly. 

"I did, so nobody else would," returned Charlotte. She wiped her eyes, drooping her stained face away from her cousin with a kind of helpless shame; then she smoothed her hair with the palms of her hands. "I know you didn't mean any harm, Rose," she added, presently. "I got my silk dress done last Wednesday; I wanted to tell you." Charlotte tried to smile at Rose with her poor swollen lips and her reddened eyes. 

"I'm sorry I said anything," Rose repeated; "I ought to have known it would make you feel bad, Charlotte." 

"No, you hadn't. I was terrible silly. Don't you want to see my dress, Rose?" 

"Oh, Charlotte! you don't want to show it to me?" 

"Yes, I do. I want you to see it--before I pack it away. It's in the north chamber." 

Rose followed Charlotte out of the room across the passageway to the north chamber. Charlotte had had one brother, who had died some ten years before, when he was twenty. The north chamber had been his room, the bureau drawers were packed with his clothes, and the silk hat which had been the pride of his early manhood hung on the nail where he had left it, and also his Sunday coat. His mother would not have them removed, but kept them there, with frequent brushings, to guard against dust and moths. 

Always when Charlotte entered this small long room, which was full of wavering lines from its uneven floor and walls and ceiling and the long arabesques on its old blue-and-white paper, whose green paper curtains with fringed white dimity ones drooping over them were always drawn, and in summertime when the windows were open undulated in the wind, she had the sense of a presence, dim, but as positive as the visions she had used to have of faces in the wandering design of the old wall-paper when she had studied it in her childhood. Ever since her brother's death she had had this sense of his presence in his room; now she thought no more of it than of any familiar figure. All the grief at his death had vanished, but she never entered his old room that the thought of him did not rise up before her and stay with her while she remained. 

Now, when she opened the door, and the opposite green and white curtains flew out in the draught towards her, they were no more evident than this presence to which she now gave no thought, and pushed by her brother's memory without a glance. 

Rose followed her to the bed. A white linen sheet was laid over the chintz counterpane. Charlotte lifted the sheet. 

"I took the last stitch on it Wednesday night," she said, in a hushed voice. 

"Didn't he come that night?" 

"I finished it before he came." 

"Did he see it?" 

Charlotte nodded. The two girls stood looking solemnly at the silk dress. 

"You can't see it here; it's too dark," said Charlotte, and she rolled up a window curtain. 

"Yes, I can see better," said Rose, in a whisper. "It's beautiful, Charlotte." 

The dress was spread widely over the bed in crisp folds. It was purple, plaided vaguely with cloudy lines of white and delicate rose-color. Over it lay a silvery lustre that was the very light of the silken fabric. 

Rose felt it reverently. "How thick it is!" said she. 

"Yes, it's a good piece," Charlotte replied. 

"You thought you'd have purple?" 

"Yes, he liked it." 

"Well, it's pretty, and it's becoming to you." 

Charlotte took up the skirt, and slipped it, loud with silken whispers, over her head. It swept out around her in a great circle; she looked like a gorgeous inverted bell-flower. 

"It's beautiful," Rose said. 

Charlotte's face, gazing downward at the silken breadths, had quite its natural expression. It was as if her mind in spite of herself would stop at old doors. 

"Try on the waist," pleaded Rose. 

Charlotte slipped off her calico waist, and thrust her firm white arms into the flaring silken sleeves of the wedding-gown. Her neck arose from it with a grand curve. She stood before the glass and strained the buttons together, frowning importantly. 

"It fits you like a glove," Rose murmured, admiringly, smoothing Charlotte's glossy back. 

"I've got a spencer-cape to wear over my neck to meeting," Charlotte said, and she opened the upper-most drawer in the chest and took out a worked muslin cape, and adjusted it carefully over her shoulders, pinning it across her bosom with a little brooch of her brother's hair in a rim of gold. 

"It's elegant," said Rose. 

"I'll show you my bonnet," said Charlotte. She went into a closet and emerged with a great green bandbox. 

Rose bent over, watching her breathlessly as she opened it. "Oh!" she cried. "Oh, Charlotte!" 

Charlotte held up the bonnet of fine Dunstable straw, flaring in front, and trimmed under the brim with a delicate lace ruche and a wreath of feathery white flowers. Bows of white gauze ribbon stood up from it stiffly. Long ribbon strings floated back over her arm as she held it up. 

"Try it on," said Rose. 

Charlotte stepped before the glass and adjusted the bonnet to her head. She tied the strings carefully under her chin in a great square bow; then she turned towards Rose. The fine white wreath under the brim encircled her face like a nimbus; she looked as she might have done sitting a bride in the meeting-house. 

"It's beautiful," Rose said, smiling, with grave eyes. "You look real handsome in it, Charlotte." Charlotte stood motionless a moment, with Rose surveying her. 

"Oh, Charlotte," Rose cried out, suddenly, "I don't believe but what you'll have him, after all!" Rose's eyes were sharp upon Charlotte's face. It was as if the bridal robes, which were so evident, became suddenly proofs of something tangible and real, like a garment left by a ghost. Rose felt a sudden conviction that the quarrel was but a temporary thing; that Charlotte would marry Barney, and that she knew it. 

A change came over Charlotte's face. She began untying the bonnet strings. 

"Sha'n't you?" repeated Rose, breathlessly. 

"No, I sha'n't." 

Charlotte took the bonnet off and smoothed the creases carefully out of the strings. 

"If I were you," Rose cried out, "I'd feel like tearing that bonnet to pieces!" 

Charlotte replaced it in the bandbox, and began unfastening her dress. 

"I don't see how you can bear the sight of them. I don't believe I could bear them in the house!" Rose cried out again. "I would put that dress in the rag-bag if it was mine!" Her cheeks burned and her eyes were quite fierce upon the dress as Charlotte slipped it off and it fell to the floor in a rustling heap around her. 

"I don't see any sense in losing everything you have ever had because you haven't got anything now," Charlotte returned, in a stern voice. She laid the shining silk gown carefully on the bed, and put on her cotton one again. Her face was quite steady. 

Rose watched her with the same sharp question in her eyes. "You know you and Barney will make it up," she said, at length. 

"No, I don't," returned Charlotte. "Suppose we go down-stairs now. I've got some work I ought to do." 

Charlotte pulled down the green paper shades of the windows, and went out of the room. Rose followed. Charlotte turned to go down-stairs, but Rose caught her arm. 

"Wait a minute," said she. "Look here, Charlotte." 

"What is it?" 

"Charlotte," said Rose again; then she stopped. 

Charlotte turned and looked at her. Rose's eyes met hers, and her face had a noble expression. 

"You write a note to him, and I'll carry it," said Rose. "I'll go down in the field where he is, on my way home." 

Tears sprang into Charlotte's eyes. "You're real good, Rose," she said; "but I can't." 

"Hadn't you better?" 

"No; I can't. Don't let's talk any more about it." 

Charlotte pushed past Rose's detaining hand, and the girls went down-stairs. Mrs. Barnard looked around dejectedly at them as they entered the kitchen. Her eyes were red, and her mouth drooping; she was clearing the débris of the pies from the table; there was a smell of baking, but Cephas had gone out. She tried to smile at Rose. "Are you goin' now?" said she. 

"Yes; I've got to. I've got to sew on my muslin dress. When are you coming over, Aunt Sarah? You haven't been over to our house for an age." 

"I don't care if I never go anywhere!" cried Sarah Barnard, with sudden desperation. "I'm discouraged." She sank in a chair, and flung her apron over her face. 

"Don't, mother," said Charlotte. 

"I can't help it," sobbed her mother. "You're young and you've got more strength to bear it, but mine's all gone. I feel worse about you than if it was myself, an' there's so much to put up with besides. I don't feel as if I could put up with things much longer, nohow." 

"Uncle Cephas ought to be ashamed of himself!" Rose cried out. 

Sarah stood up. "Well, I don't s'pose I have so much to put up with as some folks," she said, catching her breath as if it were her dignity. "Your Uncle Cephas means well. It did seem as if them sorrel pies were the last straw, but I hadn't ought to have minded it." 

"You haven't got to eat sorrel pies, have you?" Rose asked, in a bewildered way. 

"I don't s'pose they'll be any worse than some other things we eat," Sarah answered, scraping the pie-board again. 

"I don't see how you can." 

"I guess they won't hurt us any," Sarah said, shortly, and Rose looked abashed. 

"Well, I must be going," said she. 

As she went out, she looked hesitatingly at Charlotte. "Hadn't you better?" she whispered. Charlotte shook her head, and Rose went out into the spring sunlight. She bent her head as she went down the road before the sweet gusts of south wind; the white apple-trees seemed to sing, for she could not see the birds in them. 

Rose's face between the green sides of her bonnet had in it all the quickened bloom of youth in spring; her eyes had all the blue surprise of violets; she panted softly between red swelling lips as she walked; pulses beat in her crimson cheeks. Her slender figure yielded to the wind as to a lover. She passed Barney Thayer's new house; then she came opposite the field where he was at work ploughing, driving a white horse, stooping to his work in his blue frock. 

Rose stood still and looked at him; then she walked on a little way; then she paused again. Barney never looked around at her. There was the width of a field between them. 

Finally Rose went through the open bars into the first field. She crossed it slowly, holding up her skirts where there was a wet gleam through darker grass, and getting a little nosegay of violets with a busy air, as if that were what she had come for. She passed through the other bars into the second field, and Barney was only a little way from her. He did not glance at her then. He was ploughing with the look that Cadmus might have worn preparing the ground for the dragon's teeth. 

Rose held up her skirts, and went along the furrows behind him. "Hullo, Barney," she said, in a trembling voice. 

"Hullo," he returned, without looking around, and he kept on, with Rose following. 

"Barney," said she, timidly. 

"Well?" said Barney, half turning, with a slight show of courtesy. 

"Do you know if Rebecca is at home?" 

"I don't know whether she is or not." 

Barney held stubbornly to his rocking plough, and Rose followed. 

"Barney," said she, again. 

"Well?" 

"Stop a minute, and look round here." 

"I can't stop to talk." 

"Yes, you can; just a minute. Look round here." 

Barney stopped, and turned a stern, miserable face over his shoulder. 

"I've been up to Charlotte's," Rose said. 

"I don't know what that is to me." 

"Barney Thayer, ain't you ashamed of yourself?" 

"I can't stop to talk." 

"Yes, you can. Look here. Charlotte feels awfully." 

Barney stood with his back to Rose; his very shoulders had a dogged look. 

"Barney, why don't you make up with her?" 

Barney stood still. 

"Barney, she feels awfully because you didn't come back when she called you last night." 

Barney made no reply. He and the white horse stood like statues. 

"Barney, why don't you make up with her? I wish you would." Rose's voice was full of tender inflections; it might have been that of an angel peace-making. 

Barney turned around between the handles of the plough, and looked at her steadily. "You don't know anything about it, Rose," he said. 

Rose looked up in his face, and her own was full of fine pleading. "Oh, Barney," she said, "poor Charlotte does feel so bad! I know that anyhow." 

"You don't know how I am situated. I can't--" 

"Do go and see her, Barney." 

"Do you think I'm going into Cephas Barnard's house after he's ordered me out?" 

"Go up the road a little way, and she'll come and meet you. I'll run ahead and tell her." 

Barney shook his head. "I can't; you don't know anything about it, Rose." He looked into Rose's eyes. "You're real good, Rose," he said, as if with a sudden recognition of her presence. 

Rose blushed softly, a new look came into her eyes, she smiled up at him, and her face was all pink and sweet and fully set towards him, like a rose for which he was a sun. 

"No, I ain't good," she whispered. 

"Yes, you are; but I can't. You don't know anything about it." He swung about and grasped his plough-handles again. 

"Barney, do stop a minute," Rose pleaded. 

"I can't stop any longer; there's no use talking," Barney said; and he went on remorselessly through the opening furrow. Just before he turned the corner Rose made a little run forward and caught his arm. 

"You don't think I've done anything out of the way speaking to you about it, do you, Barney?" she said, and she was half crying. 

"I don't know why I should think you had; I suppose you meant all right," Barney said. He pulled his arm away softly, and jerked the right rein to turn the horse. "G'lang!" he cried out, and strode forward with a conclusive air. 

Rose stood looking after him a minute; then she struck off across the field. Her knees trembled as she stepped over the soft plough-ridges. 

When she was out on the road again she went along quickly until she came to the Thayer house. She was going past that when she heard some one calling her name, and turned to see who it was. 

Rebecca Thayer came hurrying out of the yard with a basket on her arm. "Wait a minute," she called, "and I'll go along with you." 

Chapter V 

Rebecca, walking beside Rose, looked like a woman of another race. She was much taller, and her full, luxuriant young figure looked tropical beside Rose's slender one. Her body undulated as she walked, but Rose moved only with forward flings of delicate limbs. 

"I've got to carry these eggs down to the store and get some sugar," said Rebecca. 

Rose assented, absently. She was full of the thought of her talk with Barney. 

"It's a pleasant day, ain't it?" said Rebecca. 

"Yes, it's real pleasant. Say, Rebecca, I'm awful afraid I made Barney mad just now." 

"Why, what did you do?" 

"I stopped in the field when I was going by. I'd been up to see Charlotte, and I said something about it to him." 

"How much do you know about it?" Rebecca asked, abruptly. 

"Charlotte told me this mornin', and last night when I was going to her house across lots I saw Barney going, and heard her calling him back. I thought I'd see if I couldn't coax him to make up with her, but I couldn't." 

"Oh, he'll come round," said Rebecca. 

"Then you think it'll be made up?" Rose asked, quickly. 

"Of course it will. We're having a terrible time about poor Barney. He didn't come home last night, and it's much as ever he's spoken this morning. He wouldn't eat any breakfast. He just went into his room, and put on his other clothes, and then went out in the field to work. He wouldn't tell mother anything about it. I never saw her so worked up. She's terribly afraid he's done something wrong." 

"He hasn't done anything wrong," returned Rose. "I think your mother is terrible hard on him. It's Uncle Cephas; he just picked the quarrel. He hasn't never more'n half liked Barney. So you think Barney will make up with Charlotte, and they'll get married, after all?" 

"Of course they will," Rebecca replied, promptly. "I guess they won't be such fools as not to for such a silly reason as that, when Barney's got his house 'most done, and Charlotte has got all her wedding-clothes ready." 

"Ain't Barney terrible set?" 

"He's set enough, but I guess you'll find he won't be this time." 

"Well, I'm sure I hope he won't be," Rose said, and she walked along silently, her face sober in the depths of her bonnet. 

They came to Richard Alger's house on the right-hand side of the road, and Rebecca looked reflectively at the white cottage with its steep peak of Gothic roof set upon a ploughed hill. "It's queer how he's been going with your aunt Sylvy all these years," she said. 

"Yes, 'tis," assented Rose, and she too glanced up at the house. As they looked, a man came around the corner with a basket. He was about to plant potatoes in his hilly yard. 

"There he is now," said Rose. 

They watched Richard Alger coming towards them, past a great tree whose new leaves were as red as flowers. 

"What do you suppose the reason is?" Rebecca said, in a low voice. 

"I don't know. I suppose he's got used to living this way." 

"I shouldn't think they'd be very happy," Rebecca said; and she blushed, and her voice had a shamefaced tone. 

"I don't suppose it makes so much difference when folks get older," Rose returned. 

"Maybe it don't. Rose." 

"What is it?" 

"I wish you'd go into the store with me." 

Rose laughed. "What for?" 

"Nothing. Only I wish you would." 

"You afraid of William?" Rose peered around into Rebecca's bonnet. 

Rebecca blushed until tears came to her eyes. "I'd like to know what I'd be afraid of William Berry for," she replied. 

"Then what do you want me to go into the store with you for?" 

"Nothing." 

"You're a great ninny, Rebecca Thayer," Rose said, laughing, "but I'll go if you want me to. I know William won't like it. You run away from him the whole time. There isn't another girl in Pembroke treats him as badly as you do." 

"I don't treat him badly." 

"Yes, you do. And I don't believe but what you like him, Rebecca Thayer; you wouldn't act so silly if you didn't." 

Rebecca was silent. Rose peered around in her face again. "I was only joking. I think a sight more of you for not running after him, and so does William. You haven't any idea how some of the girls act chasing to the store. Mother and I have counted 'em some days, and then we plague William about it, but he won't own up they come to see him. He acts more ashamed of it than the girls do." 

"That's one thing I never would do--run after any fellow," said Rebecca. 

"I wouldn't either." 

Then the two girls had reached the tavern and the store. Rose's father, Silas Berry, had kept the tavern, but now it was closed, except to occasional special guests. He had gained a competency, and his wife Hannah had rebelled against further toil. Then, too, the railroad had been built through East Pembroke instead of Pembroke, the old stage line had become a thing of the past, and the tavern was scantily patronized. Still, Silas Berry had given it up with great reluctance; he cherished a grudge against his wife because she had insisted upon it, and would never admit that business policy had aught to do with it. 

The store adjoining the tavern, which he had owned for years, he still retained, but his son William had charge of it. Silas Berry was growing old, and the year before had had a slight shock of paralysis, which had made him halt and feeble, although his mind was as clear as ever. However, although he took no active part in the duties of the store, he was still there, and sharply watchful for his interests, the greater part of every day. 

The two girls went up the steps to the store piazza. Rose stepped forward and looked in the door. "Father's in there, and Tommy Ray," she whispered. "You needn't be afraid to go in." But she entered as she spoke, and Rebecca followed her. 

There was one customer in the great country store, a stout old man, on the grocery side. His broad red face turned towards them a second, then squinted again at some packages on the counter. He was haggling for garden seeds. William Berry, who was waiting upon him, did not apparently look at his sister and Rebecca Thayer, but Rebecca had entered his heart as well as the store, and he saw her face deep in his own consciousness. 

Tommy Ray, the great white-headed boy who helped William in the store, shuffled along behind the counter indeterminately, but the girls did not seem to see him. Rose was talking fast to Rebecca. He lounged back against the shelves, stared out the door, and whistled. 

Out of the obscurity in the back of the store an old man's narrow bristling face peered, watchful as a cat, his body hunched up in a round-backed arm-chair. 

"Mr. Nims will go in a minute," Rose whispered, and presently the old farmer clamped past them out the door, counting his change from one hand to the other, his lips moving. 

William Berry replaced the seed packages which the customer had rejected on the shelves as the girls approached him. 

"Rebecca's got some eggs to sell," Rose announced. 

[Illustration: "'Rebecca's got some eggs to sell'"] 

William Berry's thin, wide-shouldered figure towered up behind the counter; he smiled, and the smile was only a deepening of the pleasant intensity of his beardless face, with its high pale forehead and smooth crest of fair hair. The lines in his face scarcely changed. 

"How d'ye do?" said he. 

"How d'ye do?" returned Rebecca, with fluttered dignity. Her face bloomed deeply pink in the green tunnel of her sun-bonnet, her black eyes were as soft and wary as a baby's, her full red lips had a grave, innocent expression. 

"How many dozen eggs have you got, Rebecca?" Rose inquired, peering into the basket. 

"Two; mother couldn't spare any more to-day," Rebecca replied, in a trembling voice. 

"How much sugar do you give for two dozen eggs, William?" asked Rose. 

William hesitated; he gave a scarcely perceptible glance towards the watchful old man, whose eyes seemed to gleam out of the gloom in the back of the store. "Well, about two pounds and a half," he replied, in a low voice. 

Rebecca set her basket of eggs on the counter. 

"How many pound did you tell her, William?" called the old man's hoarse voice. 

William compressed his lips. "About two and a half, father." 

"How many?" 

"Two and a half." 

"How many dozen of eggs?" 

"Two." 

"You ain't offerin' of her two pound of sugar for two dozen eggs?" 

"I said two pounds and a half of sugar, father," said William. He began counting the eggs. 

"Be you gone crazy?" 

"Never mind," whispered Rebecca. "That's too much sugar for the eggs. Mother didn't expect so much. Don't say any more about it, William." Her face was quite steady and self-possessed now, as she looked at William, frowning heavily over the eggs. 

"Give Rebecca two pounds of sugar for the eggs, father, and call it square," Rose called out. 

Silas Berry pulled himself up a joint at a time; then he came forward at a stiff halt, his face pointing out in advance of his body. He entered at the gap in the counter, and pressed close to his son's side. Then he looked sharply across at Rebecca. "Sugar is fourteen cents a pound now," said he, "an' eggs ain't fetchin' more'n ten cents a dozen. You tell your mother." 

"Father, I told her I'd giver her two and a half pounds for two dozen," said William; he was quite pale. He began counting the eggs over again, and his hands trembled. 

"I'll take just what you're willing to give," Rebecca said to Silas. 

"Sugar is fourteen cents a pound, an' eggs is fetchin' ten cents a dozen," said the old man; "you can have a pound and a half of sugar for them eggs if you can give me a cent to boot." 

Rebecca colored. "I'm afraid I haven't got a cent with me," said she; "I didn't fetch my purse. You'll have to give me a cent's worth less sugar, Mr. Berry." 

"It's kinder hard to calkilate so close as that," returned Silas, gravely; "you had better tell your mother about it, an' you come back with the cent by-an'-by." 

"Why, father!" cried Rose. 

William shouldered his father aside with a sudden motion. "I'm tending to this, father," he said, in a stern whisper; "you leave it alone." 

"I ain't goin' to stan' by an' see you givin' twice as much for eggs as they're worth 'cause it's a gal you're tradin' with. That wa'n't never my way of doin' business, an' I ain't goin' to have it done in my store. I shouldn't have laid up a cent if I'd managed any such ways, an' I ain't goin' to see my hard earnin's wasted by you. You give her a pound and a half of sugar for them eggs and a cent to boot." 

"You sha'n't lose anything by it, father," said William, fiercely. "You leave me alone." 

The sugar-barrel stood quite near. William strode over to it, and plunged in the great scoop with a grating noise. He heaped it recklessly on some paper, and laid it on the steelyards. 

"Don't give me more'n a pound and a half," Rebecca said, softly. 

"Keep still," Rose whispered in her ear. 

Silas pushed forward, and bent over the steelyards. "You've weighed out nigh three," he began. Then his son's face suddenly confronted his, and he stopped talking and stood back. 

Almost involuntarily at times Silas Berry yielded to the combination of mental and superior physical force in his son. While his own mind had lost nothing of its vigor, his bodily weakness made him distrustful of it sometimes, when his son towered over him in what seemed the might of his own lost strength and youth, brandishing his own old weapons. 

William tied up the sugar neatly; then he took the eggs from Rebecca's basket, and put the parcel in their place. Silas began lifting the eggs from the box in which William had put them, and counted them eagerly. 

"There ain't but twenty-three eggs here," he called out, as Rebecca and Rose turned away, and William was edging after them from behind the counter. 

"I thought there were two dozen," Rebecca responded, in a distressed voice. 

"Of course there are two dozen," said Rose, promptly. "You 'ain't counted 'em right, father. Go along, Rebecca; it's all right." 

"I tell ye it ain't," said Silas. "There ain't but twenty-three. It's bad enough to be payin' twice what they're wuth for eggs, without havin' of 'em come short." 

"I tell you I counted 'em twice over, and they're all right. You keep still, father," said William's voice at his ear, in a fierce whisper, and Silas subsided into sullen mutterings. 

William had meditated following Rebecca to the door; he had even meditated going farther; but now he stood back behind the counter, and began packing up some boxes with a busy air. 

"Ain't you going a piece with Rebecca, and carry her basket, William?" Rose called back, when the two girls reached the door. 

Rebecca clutched her arm. "Oh, don't," she gasped, and Rose giggled. 

"Ain't you, William?" she said again. 

Rebecca hurried out the door, but she heard William reply coldly that he couldn't, he was too busy. She was half crying when Rose caught up with her. 

"William wanted to go bad enough, but he was too upset by what father said. You mustn't mind father," Rose said, peering around into Rebecca's bonnet. "Why, Rebecca, what is the matter?" 

"I didn't go into that store a step to see William Berry. You know I didn't," Rebecca cried out, with sudden passion. Her voice was hoarse with tears; her face was all hot and quivering with shame and anger. 

"Why, of course you didn't," Rose returned, in a bewildered way. "Who said you did, Rebecca?" 

"You know I didn't. I hated to go to the store this morning. I told mother I didn't want to, but she didn't have a mite of sugar in the house, and there wasn't anybody else to send. Ephraim ain't very well, and Doctor Whiting says he ought not to walk very far. I had to come, but I didn't come to see William Berry, and nobody has any call to think I did." 

"I don't know who said you did. I don't know what you mean, Rebecca." 

"You acted as if you thought so. I don't want William Berry seeing me home in broad daylight, when I've been to the store to trade, and you needn't think that's what I came for, and he needn't." 

"Good land, Rebecca Thayer, he didn't, and I was just in fun. He'd have come with you, but he was so mad at what father said that he backed out. William's just about as easy upset as you are. I didn't mean any harm. Say, Rebecca, come into the house a little while, can't you? I don't believe your mother is in any great hurry for the sugar." Rose took hold of Rebecca's arm, but Rebecca jerked herself away with a sob, and went down the road almost on a run. 

"Well, I hope you're touchy enough, Rebecca Thayer," Rose called out, as she stood looking after her. "Folks will begin to think you did come to see William if you make such a fuss when nobody accuses you of it, if you don't look out." 

Rebecca hastened trembling down the road. She made no reply, but she knew that Rose was quite right, and that she had attacked her with futile reproaches in order to save herself from shame in her own eyes. Rebecca knew quite well that in spite of her hesitation and remonstrances, in spite of her maiden shrinking on the threshold of the store, she had come to see William Berry. She had been glad, although she had turned a hypocritical face towards her own consciousness, that Ephraim was not well enough and she was obliged to go. Her heart had leaped with joy when Rose had proposed William's walking home with her, but when he refused she was crushed with shame. "He thought I came to see him," she kept saying to herself as she hurried along, and there was no falsehood that she would not have sworn to to shield her modesty from such a thought on his part. 

When she got home and entered the kitchen, she kept her face turned away from her mother. "Here's the sugar," she said, and she took it out of the basket and placed it on the table. 

"How much did he give you?" asked Deborah Thayer; she was standing beside the window beating eggs. Over in the field she could catch a glimpse of Barnabas now and then between the trees as he passed with his plough. 

"About two pounds." 

"That was doin' pretty well." 

Rebecca said nothing. She turned to go out of the room. 

"Where are you going?" her mother asked, sharply. "Take off your bonnet. I want you to beat up the butter and sugar; this cake ought to be in the oven." 

Deborah's face, as she beat the eggs and made cake, looked as full of stern desperation as a soldier's on the battle-field. Deborah never yielded to any of the vicissitudes of life; she met them in fair fight like enemies, and vanquished them, not with trumpet and spear, but with daily duties. It was a village story how Deborah Thayer cleaned all the windows in the house one afternoon when her first child had died in the morning. To-day she was in a tumult of wrath and misery over her son; her mouth was so full of the gall of bitterness that no sweet on earth could overcome it; but she made sweet cake. 

Rebecca took off her sun-bonnet and hung it on a peg; she got a box from the pantry, and emptied the sugar into in, still keeping her face turned away as best she could from her mother's eyes. 

Deborah looked approvingly at the sugar. "It's nigher three pounds than anything else. I guess you were kind of favored, Rebecca. Did William wait on you?" 

"Yes, he did." 

"I guess you were kind of favored," Deborah repeated, and a half-smile came over her grim face. 

Rebecca said nothing. She got some butter, and fell to work with a wooden spoon, creaming the butter and sugar in a brown wooden bowl with swift turns of her strong white wrist. Ephraim watched her sharply; he sat by a window stoning raisins. His mother had forbidden him to eat any, as she thought them injurious to him; but he carefully calculated his chances, and deposited many in his mouth when she watched Barney; but his jaws were always gravely set when she turned his way. 

Ephraim's face had a curious bluish cast, as if his blood were the color of the juice of a grape. His chest heaved shortly and heavily. The village doctor had told is mother that he had heart-disease, which might prove fatal, although there was a chance of his outgrowing it, and Deborah had set her face against that. 

Ephraim's face, in spite of its sickly hue, had a perfect healthiness and naturalness of expression, which insensibly gave confidence to his friends, although it aroused their irritation. A spirit of boyish rebellion and importance looked out of Ephraim's black eyes; his mouth was demure with mischief, his gawky figure perpetually uneasy and twisting, as if to find entrance into small forbidden places. There was something in Ephraim's face, when she looked suddenly at him, which continually led his mother to infer that he had been transgressing. "What have you been doin', Ephraim?" she would call out, sharply, many a time, with no just grounds for suspicion, and be utterly routed by Ephraim's innocent, wondering grin in response. 

The boy was set about with restrictions which made his life miserable, but the labor of picking over plums for a cake was quite to his taste. He dearly loved plums, although they were especially prohibited. He rolled one quietly under his tongue, and watched Rebecca with sharp eyes. She could scarcely keep her face turned away from him and her mother too. 

"Say, mother, Rebecca's been cryin'!" Ephraim announced, suddenly. 

Deborah turned and looked at Rebecca's face bending lower over the wooden bowl; her black lashes rested on red circles, and her lips were swollen. 

"I'd like to know what you've been cryin' about," said Deborah. It was odd that she did not think that Rebecca's grief might be due to the worry over Barney; but she did not for a minute. She directly attributed it to some personal and strictly selfish consideration which should arouse her animosity. 

"Nothing," said Rebecca, with sulky misery. 

"Yes, you've been cryin' about something, too. I want to know what 'tis." 

"Nothing. I wish you wouldn't, mother." 

"Did you see William Berry over to the store?" 

"I told you I did once." 

"Well, you needn't bite my head off. Did he say anything to you?" 

"He weighed out the sugar. I know one thing: I'll never set my foot inside that store again as long as I live!" 

"I'd like to know what you mean, Rebecca Thayer." 

"I ain't going to have folks think I'm running after William Berry." 

"I'd like to know who thinks you are. If it's Hannah Berry, she needn't talk, after the way her daughter has chased over here. Mebbe it's all you Rose Berry has been to see, but I've had my doubts. What did Hannah Berry say to you?" 

"She didn't say anything. I haven't seen her." 

"What was it, then?" 

But Rebecca would not tell her mother what the trouble had been; she could not bring herself to reveal how William had been urged to walk home with her and how coldly he had refused, and finally Deborah, in spite of baffled interest, turned upon her. "Well, I hope you didn't do anything unbecoming," said she. 

"Mother, you know better." 

"Well, I hope you didn't." 

"Mother, I won't stand being talked to so!" 

"I rather think I shall talk to you all I think I ought to for your own good," said Deborah, with fierce persistency. "I ain't goin' to have any daughter of mine doin' anything bold and forward, if I know it." 

Rebecca was weeping quite openly now. "Mother, you know you sent me down to the store yourself; there wasn't anybody else to go," she sobbed out. 

"Your goin' to the store wa'n't anything. I guess you can go to the store to trade off some eggs for sugar when I'm makin' cake without William Berry thinkin' you're runnin' after him, or Hannah Berry thinkin' so either. But there wa'n't any need of your makin' any special talk with him, or lookin' as if you was tickled to death to see him." 

"I didn't. I wouldn't go across the room to see William Berry. You haven't any right to say such things to me, mother." 

"I guess I've got a right to talk to my own daughter. I should think things had come to a pretty pass if I can't speak when I see you doin' out of the way. I know one thing, you won't go to that store again. I'll go myself next time. Have you got that butter an' sugar mixed up?" 

"I hope you will go, I'm sure. I don't want to," returned Rebecca. She had stopped crying, but her face was burning; she hit the spoon with dull thuds against the wooden bowl. 

"Don't you be saucy. That's done enough; give it here." 

Deborah finished the cake with a master hand. When she measured the raisins which Ephraim had stoned she cast a sharp glance at him, but he was ready for it with beseechingly upturned sickly face. "Can't I have just one raisin, mother?" he pleaded. 

"Yes, you may, if you 'ain't eat any while you was pickin' of 'em over," she answered. And he reached over a thumb and finger and selected a large fat plum, which he ate with ostentatious relish. Ephraim's stomach oppressed him, his breath came harder, but he had a sense of triumph in his soul. This depriving him of the little creature comforts which he loved, and of the natural enjoyments of boyhood, aroused in him a blind spirit of revolution which he felt virtuous in exercising. Ephraim was absolutely conscienceless with respect to all his stolen pleasures. 

Deborah had a cooking-stove. She had a progressive spirit, and when stoves were first introduced had promptly done away with the brick oven, except on occasions when much baking-room was needed. After her new stove was set up in her back kitchen, she often alluded to Hannah Berry's conservative principles with scorn. Hannah's sister, Mrs. Barnard, had told her how a stove could be set up in the tavern any minute; but Hannah despised new notions. "Hannah won't have one, nohow," said Mrs. Barnard. "I dunno but I would, if Cephas could afford it, and wa'n't set against it. It seems to me it might save a sight of work." 
