
"Come, come, it's a prime piece," said a jolly looking woman, who was presiding at a stall which, though considerably thinned by previous purchasers, still offered many temptations to many who could not purchase. 

"And so it is widow," said a little pale man, wistfully. 

"Come, come, it's getting late, and your wife's ill; you're a good soul, we'll say fi'pence a pound, and I'll throw you the scrag end in for love." 

"No butcher's meat to-morrow for us, widow," said the man. 

"And why not, neighbour? With your wages, you ought to live like a prize-fighter, or the mayor of Mowbray at least." 

"Wages!" said the man, "I wish you may get 'em. Those villains, Shuffle and Screw, have sarved me with another bate ticket: and a pretty figure too." 

"Oh! the carnal monsters!" exclaimed the widow. "If their day don't come, the bloody-minded knaves!" 

"And for small cops, too! Small cops be hanged! Am I the man to send up a bad-bottomed cop, Widow Carey?" 

"You sent up for snicks! I have known you man and boy John Hill these twenty summers, and never heard a word against you till you got into Shuffle and Screw's mill. Oh! they are a bad yarn, John." 

"They do us all, widow. They pretends to give the same wages as the rest, and works it out in fines. You can't come, and you can't go, but there's a fine; you're never paid wages, but there's a bate ticket. I've heard they keep their whole establishment on factory fines." 

"Soul alive, but those Shuffle and Screw are rotten, snickey, bad yarns," said Mistress Carey. "Now ma'am, if you please; fi'pence ha'penny; no, ma'am, we've no weal left. Weal, indeed! you look very like a soul as feeds on weal," continued Mrs Carey in an under tone as her declining customer moved away. "Well, it gets late," said the widow, "and if you like to take this scrag end home to your wife neighbour Hill, we can talk of the rest next Saturday. And what's your will, sir?" said the widow with a stern expression to a youth who now stopped at her stall. 

He was about sixteen, with a lithe figure, and a handsome, faded, impudent face. His long, loose, white trousers gave him height; he had no waistcoat, but a pink silk handkerchief was twisted carelessly round his neck, and fastened with a very large pin, which, whatever were its materials, had unquestionably a very gorgeous appearance. A loose frock-coat of a coarse white cloth, and fastened by one button round his waist, completed his habiliments, with the addition of the covering to his head, a high-crowned dark-brown hat, which relieved his complexion, and heightened the effect of his mischievous blue eye. 

"Well, you need not be so fierce, Mother Carey," said the youth with an affected air of deprecation. 

"Don't mother me," said the jolly widow with a kindling eye; "go to your own mother, who is dying in a back cellar without a winder, while you've got lodgings in a two pair." 

"Dying; she's only drunk," said the youth. 

"And if she is only drunk," rejoined Mrs Carey in a passion, "what makes her drink but toil; working from five o'clock in the morning to seven o'clock at night, and for the like of such as you." 

"That's a good one," said the youth; "I should like to know what my mother ever did for me, but give me treacle and laudanum when I was a babby to stop my tongue and fill my stomach; by the token of which, as my gal says, she stunted the growth of the prettiest figure in all Mowbray." And here the youth drew himself up, and thrust his hands in the side pockets of his pea-jacket. 

"Well, I never," said Mrs Carey. "No; I never heard a thing like that!" 

"What, not when you cut up the jackass and sold it for veal cutlets, mother." 

"Hold your tongue, Mr Imperence," said the widow. "It's very well known you're no Christian, and who'll believe what you say?" 

"It's very well known that I'm a man what pays his way," said the boy, "and don't keep a huckster's stall to sell carrion by star-light; but live in a two pair, if you please, and has a wife and family, or as good." 

"O! you aggravating imp!" exclaimed the widow in despair, unable to wreak her vengeance on one who kept in a secure position, and whose movements were as nimble as his words. 

"Why, Madam Carey, what has Dandy Mick done to thee?" said a good-humoured voice, it came from one of two factory girls who were passing her stall and stopped. They were gaily dressed, a light handkerchief tied under the chin, their hair scrupulously arranged; they wore coral neck-laces and earrings of gold. 

"Ah! is it you, my child," said the widow, who was a good-hearted creature. "The dandy has been giving me some of his imperence." 

"But I meant nothing, dame," said Mick. "It was a joke,--only a joke." 

"Well, let it pass," said Mrs Carey. "And where have you been this long time, my child; and who's your friend?" she added in a lower tone. 

"Well, I have left Mr Trafford's mill," said the girl. 

"That's a bad job," said Mrs Carey; "for those Traffords are kind to their people. It's a great thing for a young person to be in their mill." 

"So it is," said the girl, "but then it was so dull. I can't stand a country life, Mrs Carey. I must have company." 

"Well, I do love a bit of gossip myself," said Mrs Carey, with great frankness. 

"And then I'm no scholar," said the girl, "and never could take to learning. And those Traffords had so many schools." 

"Learning is better than house and land," said Mrs Carey; "though I'm no scholar myself; but then, in my time, things was different. But young persons--" 

"Yes," said Mick; "I don't think I could get through the day, if it wurno' for our Institute." 

"And what's that?" asked Mrs Carey with a sneer. 

"The Shoddy-Court Literary and Scientific, to be sure," said Mick; "we have got fifty members, and take in three London papers; one 'Northern Star' and two 'Moral Worlds.'" 

"And where are you now, child?" continued the widow to the girl. 

"I am at Wiggins and Webster's," said the girl; "and this is my partner. We keep house together; we have a very nice room in Arbour Court, No. 7, high up; it's very airy. If you will take a dish of tea with us to-morrow, we expect some friends." 

"I take it kindly," said Mrs Carey; "and so you keep house together! All the children keep house in these days. Times is changed indeed!" 

"And we shall be happy to see you, Mick; and Julia, if you are not engaged;" continued the girl; and she looked at her friend, a pretty demure girl, who immediately said, but in a somewhat faultering tone, "Oh! that we shall." 

"And what are you going to do now, Caroline?" said Mick. 

"Well, we had no thoughts; but I said to Harriet, as it is a fine night, let us walk about as long as we can and then to-morrow we will lie in bed till afternoon." 

"That's all well eno' in winter time with plenty of baccy," said Mick, "but at this season of the year I must have life. The moment I came out I bathed in the river, and then went home and dressed," he added in a satisfied tone; "and now I am going to the Temple. I'll tell you what, Julia has been pricked to-day with a shuttle, 'tis not much, but she can't go out; I'll stand treat, and take you and your friend to the Temple." 

"Well, that's delight," said Caroline. "There's no one does the handsome thing like you, Dandy Mick, and I always say so. Oh! I love the Temple! 'Tis so genteel! I was speaking of it to Harriet last night; she never was there. I proposed to go with her--but two girls alone,--you understand me. One does not like to be seen in these places, as if one kept no company." 

"Very true," said Mick; "and now we'll be off. Good night, widow." 

"You'll remember us to-morrow evening," said Caroline. "To-morrow evening! The Temple!" murmured Mrs Carey to herself. "I think the world is turned upside downwards in these parts. A brat like Mick Radley to live in a two pair, with a wife and family, or as good as he says; and this girl asks me to take a dish of tea with her and keeps house! Fathers and mothers goes for nothing," continued Mrs Carey, as she took a very long pinch of snuff and deeply mused. "'tis the children gets the wages," she added after a profound pause, "and there it is." 

Book 2 Chapter 10 

In the meantime Gerard and Stephen stopped before a tall, thin, stuccoed house, ballustraded and friezed, very much lighted both within and without, and, from the sounds that issued from it, and the persons who retired and entered, evidently a locality of great resort and bustle. A sign, bearing the title of the Cat and Fiddle, indicated that it was a place of public entertainment, and kept by one who owned the legal name of John Trottman, though that was but a vulgar appellation, lost in his well-earned and far-famed title of Chaffing Jack. 

The companions entered the spacious premises; and making their way to the crowded bar, Stephen, with a glance serious but which indicated intimacy, caught the eye of a comely lady, who presided over the mysteries, and said in a low voice, "Is he here?" 

"In the Temple, Mr Morley, asking for you and your friend more than once. I think you had better go up. I know he wishes to see you." 

Stephen whispered to Gerard and after a moment's pause, he asked the fair president for a couple of tickets for each of which he paid threepence; a sum however, according to the printed declaration of the voucher, convertible into potential liquid refreshments, no great compensation to a very strict member of the Temperance Society of Mowbray. 

A handsome staircase with bright brass bannisters led them to an ample landing-place, on which opened a door, now closed and by which sate a boy who collected the tickets of those who would enter it. The portal was of considerable dimensions and of architectural pretension; it was painted of a bright green colour, the panels gilt. Within the pediment, described in letters of flaming gas, you read, "THE TEMPLE OF THE MUSES." 

Gerard and Morley entered an apartment very long and sufficiently lofty, though rather narrow for such proportions. The ceiling was even richly decorated; the walls were painted, and by a brush of considerable power. Each panel represented some well-known scene from Shakespeare, Byron, or Scott: King Richard, Mazeppa, the Lady of the Lake were easily recognized: in one panel, Hubert menaced Arthur; here Haidee rescued Juan; and there Jeanie Deans curtsied before the Queen. The room was very full; some three or four hundred persons were seated in different groups at different tables, eating, drinking, talking, laughing, and even smoking, for notwithstanding the pictures and the gilding it was found impossible to forbid, though there were efforts to discourage, this practice, in the Temple of the Muses. Nothing however could be more decorous than the general conduct of the company, though they consisted principally of factory people. The waiters flew about with as much agility as if they were serving nobles. In general the noise was great, though not disagreeable; sometimes a bell rang and there was comparative silence, while a curtain drew up at the further end of the room, opposite to the entrance, and where there was a theatre, the stage raised at a due elevation, and adorned with side scenes from which issued a lady in a fancy dress who sang a favourite ballad; or a gentleman elaborately habited in a farmer's costume of the old comedy, a bob-wig, silver buttons and buckles, and blue stockings, and who favoured the company with that melancholy effusion called a comic song. Some nights there was music on the stage; a young lady in a white robe with a golden harp, and attended by a gentleman in black mustachios. This was when the principal harpiste of the King of Saxony and his first fiddler happened to be passing through Mowbray, merely by accident, or on a tour of pleasure and instruction, to witness the famous scenes of British industry. Otherwise the audience of the Cat and Fiddle, we mean the Temple of the Muses, were fain to be content with four Bohemian brothers, or an equal number of Swiss sisters. The most popular amusements however were the "Thespian recitations:" by amateurs, or novices who wished to become professional. They tried their metal on an audience which could be critical. 

A sharp waiter, with a keen eye on the entering guests, immediately saluted Gerard and his friend, with profuse offers of hospitality: insisting that they wanted much refreshment; that they were both very hungry and very thirsty: that, if not hungry, they should order something to drink that would give them an appetite: if not inclined to quaff, something to eat that would make them athirst. In the midst of these embarrassing attentions, he was pushed aside by his master with, "There, go; hands wanted at the upper end; two American gentlemen from Lowell singing out for Sherry Cobler; don't know what it is; give them our bar mixture; if they complain, say it's the Mowbray slap-bang, and no mistake. Must have a name, Mr Morley; name's everything; made the fortune of the Temple: if I had called it the Saloon, it never would have filled, and perhaps the magistrates never have granted a licence." 

The speaker was a very portly man who had passed the maturity of manhood, but active as Harlequin. He had a well-favoured countenance; fair, good-humoured, but very sly. He was dressed like the head butler of the London Tavern, and was particular as to his white waistcoats and black silk stockings, punctilious as to his knee-buckles, proud of his diamond pin; that is to say when he officiated at the Temple. 

"Your mistress told us we should find you here," said Stephen, "and that you wished to see us. 

"Plenty to tell you," said their host putting his finger to his nose. "If information is wanted in this part of the world, I flatter myself--Come, Master Gerard, here's a table; what shall I call for? glass of the Mowbray slap-bang? No better; the receipt has been in our family these fifty years. Mr Morley I know won't join us. Did you say a cup of tea, Mr Morley? Water, only water; well, that's strange. Boy alive there, do you hear me call? Water wanted, glass of water for the Secretary of the Mowbray Temperance and Teatotal. Sing it out. I like titled company. Brush!" 

"And so you can give us some information about this--" 

"Be back directly." exclaimed their host: and darting off with a swift precision, that carried him through a labyrinth of tables without the slightest inconvenience to their occupiers. "Beg pardon, Mr Morley," he said, sliding again into his chair; "but saw one of the American gentlemen brandishing his bowie-knife against one of my waiters; called him Colonel; quieted him directly; a man of his rank brawling with a help; oh! no; not to be thought of; no squabbling here; licence in danger." 

"You were saying--" resumed Morley. 

"Ah! yes, about that man Hatton; remember him perfectly well; a matter of twenty or it may be nineteen years since he bolted. Queer fellow; lived upon nothing; only drank water; no temperance and teetotal then, so no excuse. Beg pardon, Mr Morley; no offence I hope; can't bear whims; but respectable societies, if they don't drink, they make speeches, hire your rooms, leads to business." 

"And this Hatton--" said Gerard. 

"Ah! a queer fellow; lent him a one-pound note--never saw it again--always remember it--last one-pound note I had. He offered me an old book instead; not in my way; took a china jar for my wife. He kept a curiosity shop; always prowling about the country, picking up old books and hunting after old monuments; called himself an antiquarian; queer fellow, that Hatton." 

"And you have heard of him since?" said Gerard rather impatiently. 

"Not a word," said their host; "never knew any one who had." 

"I thought you had something to tell us about him," said Stephen. 

"So I have; I can put you in the way of getting hold of him and anything else. I havn't lived in Mowbray man and boy for fifty years; seen it a village, and now a great town full of first-rate institutions and establishments like this," added their host surveying the Temple with a glance of admiring complacency; "I say I havn't lived here all this time and talked to the people for nothing." 

"Well, we are all attention," said Gerard with a smile. 

"Hush!" said their host as a bell sounded, and he jumped up. "Now ladies, now gentlemen, if you please; silence if you please for a song from a Polish lady. The Signora sings English like a new-born babe;" and the curtain drew up amid the hushed voices of the company and the restrained clatter of their knives and forks and glasses. 

The Polish lady sang "Cherry Ripe" to the infinite satisfaction of her audience. Young Mowbray indeed, in the shape of Dandy Mick and some of his followers and admirers, insisted on an encore. The lady as she retired curtseyed like a Prima Donna; but the host continued on his legs for some time, throwing open his coat and bowing to his guests, who expressed by their applause how much they approved his enterprise. At length he resumed his seat; "It's almost too much." he exclaimed; "the enthusiasm of these people. I believe they look upon me as a father." 

"And you think you have some clue to this Hatton?" resumed Stephen. 

"They say he has no relations," said their host. 

"I have heard as much." 

"Another glass of the bar mixture, Master Gerard. What did we call it? Oh! the bricks and beans--the Mowbray bricks and beans; known by that name in the time of my grandfather. No more! No use asking Mr Morley I know. Water! well, I must say--and yet, in an official capacity, drinking water is not so unnatural." 

"And Hatton." said Gerard; "they say he has no relations, eh?" 

"They do, and they say wrong. He has a relation; he has a brother; and I can put you in the way of finding him." 

"Well, that looks like business," said Gerard; "and where may he be?" 

"Not here," said their host; "he never put his foot in the Temple to my knowledge; and lives in a place where they have as much idea of popular institutions as any Turks or heathen you ever heard of." 

"And where might we find him?" said Stephen. 

"What's that?" said their host jumping up and looking around him. "Here boys, brush about. The American gentleman is a whittling his name on that new mahogany table. Take him the printed list of rules, stuck up in a public place, under a great coat, and fine him five shillings for damaging the furniture. If he resists (he has paid for his liquor), call in the police; X. Z. No. 5 is in the bar, taking tea with your mistress. Now brush." 

"And this place is--" 

"In the land of mines and minerals," said their host; "about ten miles from ----. He works in metals on his own account. You have heard of a place called Hell-house Yard; well, he lives there; and his name is Simon." 

"And does he keep up any communication with his brother, think you?" said Gerard. 

"Nay, I know no more; at least at present," said their host. "The secretary asked me about a person absent without leave for twenty years and who was said to have no relations, I found you one and a very near one. You are at the station and you have got your ticket. The American gentleman's wiolent. Here's the police. I must take a high tone." And with these words Chaffing Jack quitted them. 

In the meantime, we must not forget Dandy Mick and his two young friends whom he had so generously offered to treat to the Temple. 

"Well, what do you think of it?" asked Caroline of Harriet in a whisper as they entered the splendid apartment. 

"It's just what I thought the Queen lived in," said Harriet; "but indeed I'm all of a flutter." 

"Well, don't look as if you were," said her friend. 

"Come along gals," said Mick; "who's afraid? Here, we'll sit down at this table. Now, what shall we have? Here waiter; I say waiter!" 

"Yes, sir, yes, sir." 

"Well, why don't you come when I call," said Mick with a consequential air. "I have been hallooing these ten minutes. Couple of glasses of bar mixture for these ladies and go of gin for myself. And I say waiter, stop, stop, don't be in such a deuced hurry; do you think folks can drink without eating;--sausages for three; and damme, take care they are not burnt." 

"Yes, sir, directly, directly." 

"That's the way to talk to these fellows," said Mick with a self-satisfied air, and perfectly repaid by the admiring gaze of his companions. 

"It's pretty Miss Harriet," said Mick looking up at the ceiling with a careless nil admirari glance. 

"Oh! it is beautiful," said Harriet. 

"You never were here before; it's the only place. That's the Lady of the Lake," he added, pointing to a picture; "I've seen her at the Circus, with real water." 

The hissing sausages crowning a pile of mashed potatoes were placed before them; the delicate rummers of the Mowbray slap-bang, for the girls; the more masculine pewter measure for their friend. 

"Are the plates very hot?" said Mick; 

"Very sir." 

"Hot plates half the battle," said Mick. 

"Now, Caroline; here, Miss Harriet; don't take away your plate, wait for the mash; they mash their taters here very elegant." 

It was a very happy and very merry party. Mick delighted to help his guests, and to drink their healths. 

"Well," said he when the waiter had cleared away their plates, and left them to their less substantial luxuries. "Well," said Mick, sipping a renewed glass of gin twist and leaning back in his chair, "say what they please, there's nothing like life." 

"At the Traffords'," said Caroline, "the greatest fun we ever had was a singing class." 

"I pity them poor devils in the country," said Mick; "we got some of them at Collinson's--come from Suffolk they say; what they call hagricultural labourers, a very queer lot, indeed." 

"Ah! them's the himmigrants," said Caroline; "they're sold out of slavery, and sent down by Pickford's van into the labour market to bring down our wages." 

"We'll teach them a trick or two before they do that," urged Mick. "Where are you, Miss Harriet?" 

"I'm at Wiggins and Webster's, sir." 

"Where they clean machinery during meal-time; that won't do," said Mick. "I see one of your partners coming in," said Mick, making many signals to a person who very soon joined them. "Well, Devilsdust, how are you?" 

This was the familiar appellation of a young gentleman, who really had no other, baptismal or patrimonial. About a fortnight after his mother had introduced him into the world, she returned to her factory and put her infant out to nurse, that is to say, paid threepence a week to an old woman who takes charge of these new-born babes for the day, and gives them back at night to their mothers as they hurriedly return from the scene of their labour to the dungeon or the den, which is still by courtesy called "home." The expense is not great: laudanum and treacle, administered in the shape of some popular elixir, affords these innocents a brief taste of the sweets of existence, and keeping them quiet, prepares them for the silence of their impending grave. Infanticide is practised as extensively and as legally in England, as it is on the banks of the Ganges; a circumstance which apparently has not yet engaged the attention of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. But the vital principle is an impulse from an immortal artist, and sometimes baffles, even in its tenderest phasis, the machinations of society for its extinction. There are infants that will defy even starvation and poison, unnatural mothers and demon nurses. Such was the nameless one of whom we speak. We cannot say he thrived; but he would not die. So at two years of age, his mother being lost sight of, and the weekly payment having ceased, he was sent out in the street to "play," in order to be run over. Even this expedient failed. The youngest and the feeblest of the band of victims, Juggernaut spared him to Moloch. All his companions were disposed of. Three months' "play" in the streets got rid of this tender company,--shoeless, half-naked, and uncombed,--whose age varied from two to five years. Some were crushed, some were lost, some caught cold and fevers, crept back to their garret or their cellars, were dosed with Godfrey's cordial, and died in peace. The nameless one would not disappear. He always got out of the way of the carts and horses, and never lost his own. They gave him no food: he foraged for himself, and shared with the dogs the garbage of the streets. But still he lived; stunted and pale, he defied even the fatal fever which was the only habitant of his cellar that never quitted it. And slumbering at night on a bed of mouldering straw, his only protection against the plashy surface of his den, with a dungheap at his head and a cesspool at his feet, he still clung to the only roof which shielded him from the tempest. 

At length when the nameless one had completed his fifth year, the pest which never quitted the nest of cellars of which he was a citizen, raged in the quarter with such intensity, that the extinction of its swarming population was menaced. The haunt of this child was peculiarly visited. All the children gradually sickened except himself; and one night when he returned home he found the old woman herself dead, and surrounded only by corpses. The child before this had slept on the same bed of straw with a corpse, but then there were also breathing beings for his companions. A night passed only with corpses seemed to him in itself a kind of death. He stole out of the cellar, quitted the quarter of pestilence, and after much wandering laid down near the door of a factory. Fortune had guided him. Soon after break of day, he was woke by the sound of the factory bell, and found assembled a crowd of men, women, and children. The door opened, they entered, the child accompanied them. The roll was called; his unauthorized appearance noticed; he was questioned; his acuteness excited attention. A child was wanted in the Wadding Hole, a place for the manufacture of waste and damaged cotton, the refuse of the mills, which is here worked up into counterpanes and coverlids. The nameless one was prefered to the vacant post, received even a salary, more than that, a name; for as he had none, he was christened on the spot--DEVILSDUST. 

Devilsdust had entered life so early that at seventeen he combined the experience of manhood with the divine energy of youth. He was a first-rate workman and received high wages; he had availed himself of the advantages of the factory school; he soon learnt to read and write with facility, and at the moment of our history, was the leading spirit of the Shoddy-Court Literary and Scientific Institute. His great friend, his only intimate, was Dandy Mick. The apparent contrariety of their qualities and structure perhaps led to this. It is indeed the most assured basis of friendship. Devilsdust was dark and melancholy; ambitious and discontented; full of thought, and with powers of patience and perseverance that alone amounted to genius. Mick was as brilliant as his complexion; gay, irritable, evanescent, and unstable. Mick enjoyed life; his friend only endured it; yet Mick was always complaining of the lowness of his wages and the greatness of his toil; while Devilsdust never murmured, but read and pondered on the rights of labour, and sighed to vindicate his order. 

"I have some thoughts of joining the Total Abstinence," said Devilsdust; "ever since I read Stephen Morley's address it has been in my mind. We shall never get our rights till we leave off consuming exciseable articles; and the best thing to begin with is liquors." 

"Well, I could do without liquors myself," said Caroline. "If I was a lady, I would never drink anything except fresh milk from the cow." 

"Tea for my money," said Harriet; "I must say there's nothing I grudge for good tea. Now I keep house, I mean always to drink the best." 

"Well, you have not yet taken the pledge, Dusty," said Mick: "and so suppose we order a go of gin and talk this matter of temperance over." 

Devilsdust was manageable in little things, especially by Mick; he acceded, and seated himself at their table. 

"I suppose you have heard this last dodge of Shuffle and Screw, Dusty," said Mick. 

"What's that?" 

"Every man had his key given him this evening--half-a-crown a week round deducted from wages for rent. Jim Plastow told them he lodged with his father and didn't want a house; upon which they said he must let it." 

"Their day will come," said Devilsdust, thoughtfully. "I really think that those Shuffle and Screws are worse even than Truck and Trett. You knew where you were with those fellows; it was five-and-twenty per cent, off wages and very bad stuff for your money. But as for Shuffle and Screw, what with their fines and their keys, a man never knows what he has to spend. Come," he added filling his glass, "let's have a toast--Confusion to Capital." 

"That's your sort," said Mick. "Come, Caroline; drink to your partner's toast, Miss Harriet. Money's the root of all evil, which nobody can deny. We'll have the rights of labour yet; the ten-hour bill, no fines, and no individuals admitted to any work who have not completed their sixteenth year." 

"No, fifteen," said Caroline eagerly. 

"The people won't bear their grievances much longer," said Devilsdust. 

"I think one of the greatest grievances the people have," said Caroline, "is the beaks serving notice on Chaffing Jack to shut up the Temple on Sunday nights." 

"It is infamous," said Mick; "aynt we to have no recreation? One might as well live in Suffolk, where the immigrants come from, and where they are obliged to burn ricks to pass the time." 

"As for the rights of labour," said Harriet, "the people goes for nothing with this machinery." 

"And you have opened your mouth to say a very sensible thing Miss Harriet," said Mick; "but if I were Lord Paramount for eight-and-forty hours, I'd soon settle that question. Wouldn't I fire a broadside into their 'double deckers?' The battle of Navarino at Mowbray fair with fourteen squibs from the admiral's ship going off at the same time, should be nothing to it." 

"Labour may be weak, but Capital is weaker," said Devilsdust. "Their capital is all paper." 

"I tell you what," said Mick, with a knowing look, and in a lowered tone, "The only thing, my hearties, that can save this here nation, is--a--good strike." 

Book 2 Chapter 11 

"Your lordship's dinner is served," announced the groom of the chambers to Lord de Mowbray; and the noble lord led out Lady Marney. The rest followed. Egremont found himself seated next to Lady Maud Fitz-Warene, the younger daughter of the earl. Nearly opposite to him was Lady Joan. 

The ladies Fitz-Warene were sandy girls, somewhat tall, with rather good figures and a grand air; the eldest very ugly, the second rather pretty; and yet both very much alike. They had both great conversational powers, though in different ways. Lady Joan was doctrinal; Lady Maud inquisitive: the first often imparted information which you did not previously possess; the other suggested ideas which were often before in your own mind, but lay tranquil and unobserved, till called into life and notice by her fanciful and vivacious tongue. Both of them were endowed with a very remarkable self-possession; but Lady Joan wanted softness, and Lady Maud repose. 

This was the result of the rapid observation of Egremont, who was however experienced in the world and quick in his detection of manner and of character. 

The dinner was stately, as becomes the high nobility. There were many guests, yet the table seemed only a gorgeous spot in the capacious chamber. The side tables were laden with silver vases and golden shields arranged on shelves of crimson velvet. The walls were covered with Fitz-Warenes, De Mowbrays, and De Veres. The attendants glided about without noise, and with the precision of military discipline. They watched your wants, they anticipated your wishes, and they supplied all you desired with a lofty air of pompous devotion. 

"You came by the railroad?" enquired Lord de Mowbray mournfully, of Lady Marney. 

"From Marham; about ten miles from us," replied her ladyship. 

"A great revolution!" 

"Isn't it?" 

"I fear it has a very dangerous tendency to equality," said his lordship shaking his head; "I suppose Lord Marney gives them all the opposition in his power." 

"There is nobody so violent against railroads as George," said Lady Marney; "I cannot tell you what he does not do! He organized the whole of our division against the Marham line!" 

"I rather counted on him," said Lord de Mowbray, "to assist me in resisting this joint branch here; but I was surprised to learn he had consented." 

"Not until the compensation was settled," innocently remarked Lady Marney; "George never opposes them after that. He gave up all opposition to the Marham line when they agreed to his terms." 

"And yet," said Lord de Mowbray, "I think if Lord Marney would take a different view of the case and look to the moral consequences, he would hesitate. Equality, Lady Marney, equality is not our metier. If we nobles do not make a stand against the levelling spirit of the age, I am at a loss to know who will fight the battle. You many depend upon it that these railroads are very dangerous things." 

"I have no doubt of it. I suppose you have heard of Lady Vanilla's trip from Birmingham? Have you not, indeed! She came up with Lady Laura, and two of the most gentlemanlike men sitting opposite her; never met, she says, two more intelligent men. She begged one of them at Wolverhampton to change seats with her, and he was most politely willing to comply with her wishes, only it was necessary that his companion should move at the same time, for they were chained together! Two of the swell mob, sent to town for picking a pocket at Shrewsbury races." 

"A countess and a felon! So much for public conveyances," said Lord Mowbray. "But Lady Vanilla is one of those who will talk with everybody." 

"She is very amusing though," said Lady Marney. 

"I dare say she is," said Lord de Mowbray; "but believe me, my dear Lady Marney, in these times especially, a countess has something else to do than be amusing." 

"You think as property has its duties as well as its rights, rank has its bores as well as its pleasures." 

Lord Mowbray mused. 

"How do you do, Mr Jermyn?" said a lively little lady with sparkling beady black eyes, and a very yellow complexion, though with good features; "when did you arrive in the North? I have been fighting your battles finely since I saw you," she added shaking her head, rather with an expression of admonition than of sympathy. 

"You are always fighting one's battles Lady Firebrace; it is very kind of you. If it were not for you, we should none of us know how much we are all abused," replied Mr Jermyn, a young M.P. 

"They say you gave the most radical pledges," said Lady Firebrace eagerly, and not without malice. "I heard Lord Muddlebrains say that if he had had the least idea of your principles, you would not have had his influence." 

"Muddlebrains can't command a single vote," said Mr Jermyn. "He is a political humbug, the greatest of all humbugs; a man who swaggers about London clubs and consults solemnly about his influence, and in the country is a nonentity." 

"Well, that can't be said of Lord Clarinel," rejoined Lady Firebrace. 

"And have you been defending me against Lord Clarinel's attacks?" inquired Mr Jermyn. 

"No; but I am going to Wemsbury, and then I have no doubt I shall have the opportunity." 

"I am going to Wemsbury myself," said Mr Jermyn. 

"And what does Lord Clarinel think of your pledge about the pension list?" said Lady Firebrace daunted but malignant. 

"He never told me," said Mr Jermyn. 

"I believe you did not pledge yourself to the ballot?" inquired Lady Firebrace with an affected air of inquisitiveness. 

"It is a subject that requires some reflection," said Mr Jermyn. "I must consult some profound politician like Lady Firebrace. By the bye, you told my mother that the conservatives would have a majority of fifteen. Do you think they will have as much?" said Mr Jermyn with an innocent air, it now being notorious that the whig administration had a majority of double that amount. 

"I said Mr Tadpole gave us a majority of fifteen," said Lady Firebrace. "I knew he was in error; because I had happened to see Lord Melbourne's own list, made up to the last hour; and which gave the government a majority of sixty. It was only shown to three members of the cabinet," she added in a tone of triumphant mystery. 

Lady Firebrace, a great stateswoman among the tories, was proud of an admirer who was a member of the whig cabinet. She was rather an agreeable guest in a country-house, with her extensive correspondence, and her bulletins from both sides. Tadpole flattered by her notice, and charmed with female society that talked his own slang, and entered with affected enthusiasm into all his dirty plots and barren machinations, was vigilant in his communications; while her whig cavalier, an easy individual who always made love by talking or writing politics, abandoned himself without reserve, and instructed Lady Firebrace regularly after every council. Taper looked grave at this connection between Tadpole and Lady Firebrace; and whenever an election was lost, or a division stuck in the mud, he gave the cue with a nod and a monosyllable, and the conservative pack that infests clubs, chattering on subjects of which it is impossible they can know anything, instantly began barking and yelping, denouncing traitors, and wondering how the leaders could be so led by the nose, and not see that which was flagrant to the whole world. If, on the other hand, the advantage seemed to go with the Canton Club, or the opposition benches, then it was the whig and liberal hounds who howled and moaned, explaining everything by the indiscretion, infatuation, treason, of Lord Viscount Masque, and appealing to the initiated world of idiots around them, whether any party could ever succeed, hampered by such men, and influenced by such means. 

The best of the joke was, that all this time Lord Masque and Tadpole were two old foxes, neither of whom conveyed to Lady Firebrace a single circumstance but with the wish, intention, and malice aforethought, that it should be communicated to his rival. 

"I must get you to interest Lord de Mowbray in our cause," said Sir Vavasour Firebrace, in an insinuating voice to his neighbour, Lady Joan; "I have sent him a large packet of documents. You know, he is one of us; still one of us. Once a baronet, always a baronet. The dignity merges, but does not cease; and happy as I am to see one covered with high honours, who is in every way so worthy of them, still I confess to you it is not so much as Earl de Mowbray that your worthy father interests me, as in his undoubted character and capacity of Sir Altamont Fitz-Warene, baronet." 

"You have the data on which you move I suppose well digested," said Lady Joan, attentive but not interested. 

"The case is clear; as far as equity is concerned, irresistible; indeed the late king pledged himself to a certain point. But if you would do me the favour of reading our memorial." 

"The proposition is not one adapted to our present civilisation," said Lady Joan. "A baronetcy has become the distinction of the middle class; a physician, our physician for example, is a baronet; and I dare say some of our tradesmen; brewers, of people of that class. An attempt to elevate them into an order of nobility, however inferior, would partake in some degree of the ridiculous." 

"And has the duke escaped his gout this year?" enquired Lord Marney of Lady de Mowbray. 

"A very slight touch; I never knew my father so well. I expect you will meet him here. We look for him daily." 

"I shall be delighted; I hope he will come to Marney in October. I keep the blue ribbon cover for him." 

"What you suggest is very just," said Egremont to Lady Maud. "If we only in our own spheres made the exertion, the general effect would be great. Marney Abbey, for instance, I believe one of the finest of our monastic remains,--that indeed is not disputed--diminished yearly to repair barns; the cattle browsing in the nave; all this might be prevented, If my brother would not consent to preserve or to restore, still any member of the family, even I, without expense, only with a little zeal as you say, might prevent mischief, might stop at least demolition." 

"If this movement in the church had only revived a taste for Christian architecture," said Lady Maud, "it would not have been barren, and it has done so much more! But I am surprised that old families can be so dead to our national art; so full of our ancestors, their exploits, their mind. Indeed you and I have no excuse for such indifference Mr Egremont." 

"And I do not think I shall ever again be justly accused of it," replied Egremont, "you plead its cause so effectively. But to tell you the truth, I have been thinking of late about these things; monasteries and so on; the influence of the old church system on the happiness and comfort of the People." 

"And on the tone of the Nobles--do not you think so?" said Lady Maud. "I know it is the fashion to deride the crusades, but do not you think they had their origin in a great impulse, and in a certain sense, led to great results? Pardon me, if I speak with emphasis, but I never can forget I am a daughter of the first crusaders." 

"The tone of society is certainly lower than of yore," said Egremont. "It is easy to say we view the past through a fallacious medium. We have however ample evidence that men feel less deeply than of old and act with less devotion. But how far is this occasioned by the modern position of our church? That is the question." 

"You must speak to Mr St Lys about that," said Lady Maud. "Do you know him?" she added in a lowered tone. 

"No; is he here?" 

"Next to mamma." 

And looking in that direction, on the left hand of Lady Mowbray, Egremont beheld a gentleman in the last year of his youth, if youth according to the scale of Hippocrates cease at thirty-five. He was distinguished by that beauty of the noble English blood, of which in these days few types remain; the Norman tempered by the Saxon; the fire of conquest softened by integrity; and a serene, though inflexible habit of mind. The chains of convention, an external life grown out of all proportion with that of the heart and mind, have destroyed this dignified beauty. There is no longer in fact an aristocracy in England, for the superiority of the animal man is an essential quality of aristocracy. But that it once existed, any collection of portraits from the sixteenth century will show. 

Aubrey St Lys was a younger son of the most ancient Norman family in England. The Conqueror had given them the moderate estate on which they now lived, and which, in spite of so many civil conflicts and religious changes, they had handed down to each other, from generation to generation, for eight centuries. Aubrey St Lys was the vicar of Mowbray. He had been the college tutor of the late Lord Fitz-Warene, whose mind he had formed, whose bright abilities he had cultivated, who adored him. To that connection he owed the slight preferment which he possessed, but which was all he desired. A bishopric would not have tempted him from his peculiar charge. 

In the centre of the town of Mowbray teeming with its toiling thousands, there rose a building which might vie with many of the cathedrals of our land. Beautiful its solemn towers, its sculptured western front; beautiful its columned aisles and lofty nave; its sparkling shrine and delicate chantry; most beautiful the streaming glories of its vast orient light! 

This magnificent temple, built by the monks of Mowbray, and once connected with their famous house of which not a trace now remained, had in time become the parish church of an obscure village, whose population could not have filled one of its side chapels. These strange vicissitudes of ecclesiastical buildings are not singular in the north of England. 

Mowbray Church remained for centuries the wonder of passing peasants, and the glory of county histories. But there is a magic in beautiful buildings which exercises an irresistible influence over the mind of man. One of the reasons urged for the destruction of the monasteries after the dispersion of their inhabitants, was the pernicious influence of their solemn and stately forms on the memories and imagination of those that beheld them. It was impossible to connect systematic crime with the creators of such divine fabrics. And so it was with Mowbray Church. When manufactures were introduced into this district, which abounded with all the qualities which were necessary for their successful pursuit, Mowbray offering equal though not superior advantages to other positions, was accorded the preference, "because it possessed such a beautiful church." The lingering genius of the monks of Mowbray hovered round the spot which they had adorned, and sanctified, and loved; and thus they had indirectly become the authors of its present greatness and prosperity. 

Unhappily for a long season the vicars of Mowbray had been little conscious of their mission. An immense population gathered round the sacred citadel and gradually spread on all sides of it for miles. But the parish church for a long time remained the only one at Mowbray when the population of the town exceeded that of some European capitals. And even in the parish church the frigid spell of Erastian self-complacency fatally prevailed. A scanty congregation gathered together for form, and as much influenced by party as higher sentiments. Going to church was held more genteel than going to meeting. The principal tradesmen of the neighbouring great houses deemed it more "aristocratic;" using a favourite and hackneyed epithet which only expressed their own servility. About the time the Church Commission issued, the congregation of Mowbray was approaching zero. There was an idea afloat for a time of making it the seat of a new bishopric; the cathedral was ready; another instance of the influence of fine art. But there was no residence for the projected prelate, and a jobbing bishop on the commission was afraid that he might have to contribute to building one. So the idea died away; and the living having become vacant at this moment, instead of a bishop, Mowbray received a humble vicar in the shape of Aubrey St Lys, who came among a hundred thousand heathens to preach "the Unknown God." 

Book 2 Chapter 12 

"And how do you find the people about you, Marney?" said Lord de Mowbray seating himself on a sofa by his guest. 

"All very well, my lord," replied the earl, who ever treated Lord de Mowbray with a certain degree of ceremony, especially when the descendant of the crusaders affected the familiar. There was something of a Puck-like malignity in the temperament of Lord Marney, which exhibited itself in a remarkable talent for mortifying persons in a small way; by a gesture, an expression, a look, cloaked too very often with all the character of profound deference. The old nobility of Spain delighted to address each other only by their names, when in the presence of a spick-and-span grandee; calling each other, "Infantado," "Sidonia," "Ossuna," and then turning round with the most distinguished consideration, and appealing to the Most Noble Marquis of Ensenada. 

"They begin to get a little uneasy here," said Lord de Mowbray. 

"We have nothing to complain of," said Lord Marney. "We continue reducing the rates, and as long as we do that the country must improve. The workhouse test tells. We had the other day a case of incendiarism, which frightened some people: but I inquired into it, and am quite satisfied it originated in purely accidental circumstances; at least nothing to do with wages. I ought to be a judge, for it was on my own property." 

"And what is the rate of wages, in your part of the world, Lord Marney?" inquired Mr St Lys who was standing by. 

"Oh! good enough: not like your manufacturing districts; but people who work in the open air, instead of a furnace, can't expect, and don't require such. They get their eight shillings a week; at least generally." 

"Eight shillings a week!" said Mr St Lys. "Can a labouring man with a family, perhaps of eight children, live on eight shillings a week!" 

"Oh! as for that," said Lord Marney; "they get more than that, because there is beer-money allowed, at least to a great extent among us, though I for one do not approve of the practice, and that makes nearly a shilling per week additional; and then some of them have potatoe grounds, though I am entirely opposed to that system. 

"And yet," said Mr St Lys, "how they contrive to live is to me marvellous." 

"Oh! as for that," said Lord Marney, "I have generally found the higher the wages the worse the workman. They only spend their money in the beer-shops. They are the curse of this country." 

"But what is a poor man to do," said Mr St Lys; "after his day's work if he returns to his own roof and finds no home: his fire extinguished, his food unprepared; the partner of his life, wearied with labour in the field or the factory, still absent, or perhaps in bed from exhaustion, or because she has returned wet to the skin, and has no change of raiment for her relief. We have removed woman from her sphere; we may have reduced wages by her introduction into the market of labour; but under these circumstances what we call domestic life is a condition impossible to be realized for the people of this country; and we must not therefore be surprised that they seek solace or rather refuge in the beer-shop." 

Lord Marney looked up at Mr St Lys, with a stare of high-bred impertinence, and then carelessly observed, without directing his words to him, "They may say what they like, but it is all an affair of population." 

"I would rather believe that it is an affair of resources," said Mr St Lys; "not what is the amount of our population, but what is the amount of our resources for their maintenance. 

"It comes to the same thing," said Lord Marney. "Nothing can put this country right but emigration on a great scale; and as the government do not choose to undertake it, I have commenced it for my own defence on a small scale. I will take care that the population of my parishes is not increased. I build no cottages and I destroy all I can; and I am not ashamed or afraid to say so." 

"You have declared war to the cottage, then," said Mr St Lys, smiling. "It is not at the first sound so startling a cry as war to the castle." 

"But you think it may lead to it?" said Lord Mowbray. 

"I love not to be a prophet of evil," said Mr St Lys. 

Lord Marney rose from his seat and addressed Lady Firebrace, whose husband in another part of the room had caught Mr Jermyn, and was opening his mind on "the question of the day;" Lady Maud, followed by Egremont, approached Mr St Lys, and said, "Mr Egremont has a great feeling for Christian architecture, Mr St Lys, and wishes particularly to visit our church of which we are so proud." And in a few moments they were seated together and engaged in conversation. 

Lord Mowbray placed himself by the side of Lady Marney, who was seated by his countess. 

"Oh! how I envy you at Marney," he exclaimed. "No manufactures, no smoke; living in the midst of a beautiful park and surrounded by a contented peasantry!" 

"It is very delightful," said Lady Marney, "but then we are so very dull; we have really no neighbourhood." 

"I think that such a great advantage," said Lady Mowbray: "I must say I like my friends from London. I never know what to say to the people here. Excellent people, the very best people in the world; the way they behaved to poor dear Fitz-Warene, when they wanted him to stand for the county, I never can forget; but then they do not know the people we know, or do the things we do; and when you have gone through the routine of county questions, and exhausted the weather and all the winds, I am positively, my dear Lady Marney, aux abois, and then they think you are proud, when really one is only stupid." 

"I am very fond of work," said Lady Marney, "and I talk to them always about it." 

"Ah! you are fortunate, I never could work; and Joan and Maud, they neither of them work. Maud did embroider a banner once for her brother; it is in the hail. I think it beautiful; but somehow or other she never cultivated her talent." 

"For all that has occurred or may occur," said Mr St Lys to Egremont, "I blame only the Church. The church deserted the people; and from that moment the church has been in danger and the people degraded. Formerly religion undertook to satisfy the noble wants of human nature, and by its festivals relieved the painful weariness of toil. The day of rest was consecrated, if not always to elevated thought, at least to sweet and noble sentiments. The church convened to its solemnities under its splendid and almost celestial roofs amid the finest monuments of art that human hands have raised, the whole Christian population; for there, in the presence of God, all were brethren. It shared equally among all its prayer, its incense, and its music; its sacred instructions, and the highest enjoyments that the arts could afford." 

"You believe then in the efficacy of forms and ceremonies?" 

"What you call forms and ceremonies represent the divinest instincts of our nature. Push your aversion to forms and ceremonies to a legitimate conclusion, and you would prefer kneeling in a barn rather than in a cathedral. Your tenets would strike at the very existence of all art, which is essentially spiritual." 

"I am not speaking abstractedly," said Egremont, "but rather with reference to the indirect connection of these forms and ceremonies with another church. The people of this country associate them with an enthralling superstition and a foreign dominion." 

"With Rome," said Mr St Lys; "yet forms and ceremonies existed before Rome." 

"But practically," said Egremont, "has not their revival in our service at the present day a tendency to restore the Romish system in this country?" 

"It is difficult to ascertain what may be the practical effect of certain circumstances among the uninformed," said Mr St Lys. "The church of Rome is to be respected as the only Hebraeo-christian church extant; all other churches established by the Hebrew apostles have disappeared, but Rome remains; and we must never permit the exaggerated position which it assumed in the middle centuries to make us forget its early and apostolical character, when it was fresh from Palestine and as it were fragrant from Paradise. The church of Rome is sustained by apostolical succession; but apostolical succession is not an institution complete in itself; it is a part of a whole; if it be not part of a whole it has no foundation. The apostles succeeded the prophets. Our Master announced himself as the last of the prophets. They in their turn were the heirs of the patriarchs: men who were in direct communication with the Most High. To men not less favoured than the apostles, the revelation of the priestly character was made, and those forms and ceremonies ordained, which the church of Rome has never relinquished. But Rome did not invent them: upon their practice, the duty of all congregations, we cannot consent to her founding a claim to supremacy. For would you maintain then that the church did not exist in the time of the prophets? Was Moses then not a churchman? And Aaron, was he not a high priest? Ay! greater than any pope or prelate, whether he be at Rome or at Lambeth. 

"In all these church discussions, we are apt to forget that the second Testament is avowedly only a supplement. Jehovah-Jesus came to complete the 'law and the prophets.' Christianity is completed Judaism, or it is nothing. Christianity is incomprehensible without Judaism, as Judaism is incomplete; without Christianity. What has Rome to do with its completion; what with its commencement? The law was not thundered forth from the Capitolian mount; the divine atonement was not fulfilled upon Mons Sacer. No; the order of our priesthood comes directly from Jehovah; and the forms and ceremonies of His church are the regulations of His supreme intelligence. Rome indeed boasts that the authenticity of the second Testament depends upon the recognition of her infallibility. The authenticity of the second Testament depends upon its congruity with the first. Did Rome preserve that? I recognize in the church an institution thoroughly, sincerely, catholic: adapted to all climes and to all ages. I do not bow to the necessity of a visible head in a defined locality; but were I to seek for such, it would not be at Rome. I cannot discover in its history however memorable any testimony of a mission so sublime. When Omnipotence deigned to be incarnate, the Ineffable Word did not select a Roman frame. The prophets were not Romans; the apostles were not Romans; she, who was blessed above all women, I never heard she was a Roman maiden. No, I should look to a land more distant than Italy, to a city more sacred even than Rome." 

Book 2 Chapter 13 

It was a cloudy, glimmering dawn. A cold withering east wind blew through the silent streets of Mowbray. The sounds of the night had died away, the voices of the day had not commenced. There reigned a stillness complete and absorbing. 

Suddenly there is a voice, there is movement. The first footstep of the new week of toil is heard. A man muffled up in a thick coat, and bearing in his hand what would seem at the first glance to be a shepherd's crook, only its handle is much longer, appears upon the pavement. He touches a number of windows with great quickness as he moves rapidly along. A rattling noise sounds upon each pane. The use of the long handle of his instrument becomes apparent as he proceeds, enabling him as it does to reach the upper windows of the dwellings whose inmates he has to rouse. Those inmates are the factory girls, who subscribe in districts to engage these heralds of the dawn; and by a strict observance of whose citation they can alone escape the dreaded fine that awaits those who have not arrived at the door of the factory before the bell ceases to sound. 

The sentry in question, quitting the streets, and stooping through one of the small archways that we have before noticed, entered a court. Here lodged a multitude of his employers; and the long crook as it were by some sleight of hand seemed sounding on both sides and at many windows at the same moment. Arrived at the end of the court, he was about to touch the window of the upper story of the last tenement, when that window opened, and a man, pale and care-worn and in a melancholy voice spoke to him. 

"Simmons," said the man, "you need not rouse this story any more; my daughter has left us." 

"Has she left Webster's?" 

"No; but she has left us. She has long murmured at her hard lot; working like a slave and not for herself. And she has gone, as they all go, to keep house for herself." 

"That's a bad business," said the watchman, in a tone not devoid of sympathy. 

"Almost as bad as for parents to live on their childrens' wages," replied the man mournfully. 

"And how is your good woman?" 

"As poorly as needs be. Harriet has never been home since Friday night. She owes you nothing?" 

"Not a halfpenny. She was as regular as a little bee and always paid every Monday morning. I am sorry she has left you, neighbour." 

"The Lord's will be done. It's hard times for such as us," said the man; and leaving the window open, he retired into his room. 

It was a single chamber of which he was the tenant. In the centre, placed so as to gain the best light which the gloomy situation could afford, was a loom. In two corners of the room were mattresses placed on the floor, a check curtain hung upon a string if necessary concealing them. In one was his sick wife; in the other, three young children: two girls, the eldest about eight years of age; between them their baby brother. An iron kettle was by the hearth, and on the mantel-piece, some candles, a few lucifer matches, two tin mugs, a paper of salt, and an iron spoon. In a farther part, close to the wall, was a heavy table or dresser; this was a fixture, as well as the form which was fastened by it. 

The man seated himself at his loom; he commenced his daily task. 

"Twelve hours of daily labour at the rate of one penny each hour; and even this labour is mortgaged! How is this to end? Is it rather not ended?" And he looked around him at his chamber without resources: no food, no fuel, no furniture, and four human beings dependent on him, and lying in their wretched beds because they had no clothes. "I cannot sell my loom," he continued, "at the price of old firewood, and it cost me gold. It is not vice that has brought me to this, nor indolence, nor imprudence. I was born to labour, and I was ready to labour. I loved my loom and my loom loved me. It gave me a cottage in my native village, surrounded by a garden of whose claims on my solicitude it was not jealous. There was time for both. It gave me for a wife the maiden that I had ever loved; and it gathered my children round my hearth with plenteousness and peace. I was content: I sought no other lot. It is not adversity that makes me look back upon the past with tenderness. 

"Then why am I here? Why am I, and six hundred thousand subjects of the Queen, honest, loyal, and industrious, why are we, after manfully struggling for years, and each year sinking lower in the scale, why are we driven from our innocent and happy homes, our country cottages that we loved, first to bide in close towns without comforts, and gradually to crouch into cellars, or find a squalid lair like this, without even the common necessaries of existence; first the ordinary conveniences of life, then raiment, and, at length, food, vanishing from us. 

"It is that the Capitalist has found a slave that has supplanted the labour and ingenuity of man. Once he was an artizan: at the best, he now only watches machines; and even that occupation slips from his grasp, to the woman and the child. The capitalist flourishes, he amasses immense wealth; we sink, lower and lower; lower than the beasts of burthen; for they are fed better than we are, cared for more. And it is just, for according to the present system they are more precious. And yet they tell us that the interests of Capital and of Labour are identical. 

"If a society that has been created by labour suddenly becomes independent of it, that society is bound to maintain the race whose only property is labour, from the proceeds of that property, which has not ceased to be productive. 

"When the class of the Nobility were supplanted in France, they did not amount in number to one-third of us Hand-Loom weavers; yet all Europe went to war to avenge their wrongs, every state subscribed to maintain them in their adversity, and when they were restored to their own country, their own land supplied them with an immense indemnity. Who cares for us? Yet we have lost our estates. Who raises a voice for us? Yet we are at least as innocent as the nobility of France. We sink among no sighs except our own. And if they give us sympathy--what then? Sympathy is the solace of the Poor; but for the Rich, there is Compensation." 

"Is that Harriet?" said his wife moving in her bed. 

The Hand-Loom weaver was recalled from his reverie to the urgent misery that surrounded him. 

"No!" he replied in a quick hoarse voice, "it is not Harriet." 

"Why does not Harriet come?" 

"She will come no more!" replied the weaver; "I told you so last night: she can bear this place no longer; and I am not surprised." 

"How are we to get food then?" rejoined his wife; "you ought not to have let her leave us. You do nothing, Warner. You get no wages yourself; and you have let the girl escape." 

"I will escape myself if you say that again," said the weaver: "I have been up these three hours finishing this piece which ought to have been taken home on Saturday night." 

"But you have been paid for it beforehand. You get nothing for your work. A penny an hour! What sort of work is it, that brings a penny an hour?" 

"Work that you have often admired, Mary; and has before this gained a prize. But if you don't like the work," said the man quitting his loom, "let it alone. There was enough yet owing on this piece to have allowed us to break our fast. However, no matter; we must starve sooner or later. Let us begin at once." 

"No, no, Philip! work. Let us break our fast come what may." 

"Twit me no more then," said the weaver resuming his seat, "or I throw the shuttle for the last time." 

"I will not taunt you," said his wife in a kinder tone. "I was wrong; I am sorry; but I am very ill. It is not for myself I speak; I want not to eat; I have no appetite; my lips are so very parched. But the children, the children went supperless to bed, and they will wake soon." 

"Mother, we ayn't asleep," said the elder girl. 

"No, we aynt asleep, mother," said her sister; "we heard all that you said to father." 

"And baby?" 

"He sleeps still." 

"I shiver very much!" said the mother. "It's a cold day. Pray shut the window Warner. I see the drops upon the pane; it is raining. I wonder if the persons below would lend us one block of coal." 

"We have borrowed too often," said Warner. 

"I wish there were no such thing as coal in the land," said his wife, "and then the engines would not be able to work; and we should have our rights again." 

"Amen!" said Warner. 

"Don't you think Warner," said his wife, "that you could sell that piece to some other person, and owe Barber for the money he advanced?" 

"No!" said her husband shaking his head. "I'll go straight." 

"And let your children starve," said his wife, "when you could get five or six shillings at once. But so it always was with you! Why did not you go to the machines years ago like other men and so get used to them?" 

"I should have been supplanted by this time," said Warner, "by a girl or a woman! It would have been just as bad!" 

"Why there was your friend Walter Gerard; he was the same as you, and yet now he gets two pound a-week; at least I have often heard you say so." 

"Walter Gerard is a man of great parts," said Warner, "and might have been a master himself by this time had he cared." 

"And why did he not?" 

"He had no wife and children," said Warner; "he was not so blessed." 

The baby woke and began to cry. 

"Ah! my child!" exclaimed the mother. "That wicked Harriet! Here Amelia, I have a morsel of crust here. I saved it yesterday for baby; moisten it in water, and tie it up in this piece of calico: he will suck it; it will keep him quiet; I can bear anything but his cry." 

"I shall have finished my job by noon," said Warner; "and then, please God, we shall break our fast." 

"It is yet two hours to noon," said his wife. "And Barber always keeps you so long! I cannot bear that Barber: I dare say he will not advance you money again as you did not bring the job home on Saturday night. If I were you, Philip, I would go and sell the piece unfinished at once to one of the cheap shops." 

"I have gone straight all my life," said Warner. 

"And much good it has done you," said his wife. 

"My poor Amelia! How she shivers! I think the sun never touches this house. It is indeed a most wretched place!" 

"It will not annoy you long, Mary," said her husband: "I can pay no more rent; and I only wonder they have not been here already to take the week." 

"And where are we to go?" said the wife. 

"To a place which certainly the sun never touches," said her husband, with a kind of malice in his misery,--"to a cellar!" 

"Oh! why was I ever born!" exclaimed his wife. "And yet I was so happy once! And it is not our fault. I cannot make it out Warner, why you should not get two pounds a-week like Walter Gerard?" 

"Bah!" said the husband. 

"You said he had no family," continued his wife. "I thought he had a daughter." 

"But she is no burthen to him. The sister of Mr Trafford is the Superior of the convent here, and she took Sybil when her mother died, and brought her up." 

"Oh! then she is a nun?" 

"Not yet; but I dare say it will end in it." 

"Well, I think I would even sooner starve," said his wife, "than my children should be nuns." 

At this moment there was a knocking at the door. Warner descended from his loom and opened it. 

"Lives Philip Warner here?" enquired a clear voice of peculiar sweetness. 

"My name is Warner." 

"I come from Walter Gerard," continued the voice. "Your letter reached him only last night. The girl at whose house your daughter left it has quitted this week past Mr Trafford's factory." 

"Pray enter." 

And there entered SYBIL. 

Book 2 Chapter 14 

"Your wife is ill?" said Sybil. 

"Very!" replied Warner's wife. "Our daughter has behaved infamously to us. She has quitted us without saying by your leave or with your leave. And her wages were almost the only thing left to us; for Philip is not like Walter Gerard you see: he cannot earn two pounds a-week, though why he cannot I never could understand." 

"Hush, hush, wife!" said Warner. "I speak I apprehend to Gerard's daughter?" 

"Just so." 

"Ah! this is good and kind; this is like old times, for Walter Gerard was my friend, when I was not exactly as I am now." 

"He tells me so: he sent a messenger to me last night to visit you this morning. Your letter reached him only yesterday." 

"Harriet was to give it to Caroline," said the wife. "That's the girl who has done all the mischief and inveigled her away. And she has left Trafford's works, has she? Then I will be bound she and Harriet are keeping house together." 

"You suffer?" said Sybil, moving to the bed-side of the woman; "give me your hand," she added in a soft sweet tone. "'Tis hot." 

"I feel very cold," said the woman. "Warner would have the window open, till the rain came in." 

"And you, I fear, are wet," said Warner, addressing Sybil, and interrupting his wife. 

"Very slightly. And you have no fire. Ah! I have brought some things for you, but not fuel." 

"If he would only ask the person down stairs," said his wife, "for a block of coal; I tell him, neighbours could hardly refuse; but he never will do anything; he says he has asked too often." 

"I will ask," said Sybil. "But first, I have a companion without," she added, "who bears a basket for you. Come in, Harold." 

The baby began to cry the moment a large dog entered the room; a young bloodhound of the ancient breed, such as are now found but in a few old halls and granges in the north of England. Sybil untied the basket, and gave a piece of sugar to the screaming infant. Her glance was sweeter even than her remedy; the infant stared at her with his large blue eyes; for an instant astonished, and then he smiled. 

"Oh! beautiful child!" exclaimed Sybil; and she took the babe up from the mattress and embraced it. 

"You are an angel from heaven," exclaimed the mother, "and you may well say beautiful. And only to think of that infamous girl, Harriet, to desert us all in this way." 

Sybil drew forth the contents of the convent basket, and called Warner's attention to them. "Now," she said, "arrange all this as I tell you, and I will go down stairs and speak to them below as you wish, Harold rest there;" and the dog laid himself down in the remotest corner. 

"And is that Gerard's daughter?" said the weaver's wife. "Only think what it is to gain two pounds a-week, and bring up your daughters in that way--instead of such shameless husseys as our Harriet! But with such wages one can do anything. What have you there, Warner? Is that tea? Oh! I should like some tea. I do think tea would do me some good. I have quite a longing for it. Run down, Warner, and ask them to let us have a kettle of hot water. It is better than all the fire in the world. Amelia, my dear, do you see what they have sent us. Plenty to eat. Tell Maria all about it. You are good girls; you will never be like that infamous Harriet. When you earn wages you will give them to your poor mother and baby, won't you?" 

"Yes, mother," said Amelia. 

"And father, too," said Maria. 

"And father, too," said the wife. "He has been a very good father to you all; and I never can understand why one who works so hard should earn so little; but I believe it is the fault of those machines. The police ought to put them down, and then every body would be comfortable." 

Sybil and Warner re-entered; the fire was lit, the tea made, the meal partaken. An air of comfort, even of enjoyment, was diffused over this chamber, but a few minutes back so desolate and unhappy. 

"Well," said the wife, raising herself a little up in her bed, "I feel as if that dish of tea had saved my life. Amelia, have you had any tea? And Maria? You see what it is to be good girls; the Lord will never desert you. The day is fast coming when that Harriet will know what the want of a dish of tea is, with all her fine wages. And I am sure," she added, addressing Sybil, "what we all owe to you is not to be told. Your father well deserves his good fortune, with such a daughter." 

"My father's fortunes are not much better than his neighbours," said Sybil, "but his wants are few; and who should sympathise with the poor, but the poor? Alas! none else can. Besides, it is the Superior of our convent that has sent you this meal. What my father can do for you, I have told your husband. 'Tis little; but with the favour of heaven, it may avail. When the people support the people, the divine blessing will not be wanting." 

"I am sure the divine blessing will never be wanting to you," said Warner in a voice of great emotion. 

There was silence; the querulous spirit of the wife was subdued by the tone of Sybil; she revolved in her mind the present and the past; the children pursued their ungrudged and unusual meal; the daughter of Gerard, that she might not interfere with their occupation, walked to the window and surveyed the chink of troubled sky, which was visible in the court. The wind blew in gusts; the rain beat against the glass. Soon after this, there was another knock at the door. Harold started from his repose, and growled. Warner rose, and saying, "they have come for the rent. Thank God, I am ready," advanced and opened the door. Two men offered with courtesy to enter. 

"We are strangers," said he who took the lead, "but would not be such. I speak to Warner?" 

"My name." 

"And I am your spiritual pastor, if to be the vicar of Mowbray entitles me to that description." 

"Mr St Lys." 

"The same. One of the most valued of my flock, and the most influential person in this district, has been speaking much of you to me this morning. You are working for him. He did not hear of you on Saturday night; he feared you were ill. Mr Barber spoke to me of your distress, as well as of your good character. I came to express to you my respect and my sympathy, and to offer you my assistance." 

"You are most good, sir, and Mr Barber too, and indeed, an hour ago, we were in as great straits--." 

"And are now, sir," exclaimed his wife interrupting him. "I have been in this bed a-week, and may never rise from it again; the children have no clothes; they are pawned; everything is pawned; this morning we had neither fuel, nor food. And we thought you had come for the rent which we cannot pay. If it had not been for a dish of tea which was charitably given me this morning by a person almost as poor as ourselves that is to say, they live by labour, though their wages are much higher, as high as two pounds a-week, though how that can be I never shall understand, when my husband is working twelve hours a day, and gaining only a penny an hour--if it had not been for this I should have been a corpse; and yet he says we were in straits, merely because Walter Gerard's daughter, who I willingly grant is an angel from heaven for all the good she has done us, has stepped into our aid. But the poor supporting the poor, as she well says, what good can come from that!" 

During this ebullition, Mr St Lys had surveyed the apartment and recognised Sybil. 

"Sister," he said when the wife of Warner had ceased, "this is not the first time we have met under the roof of sorrow." 

Sybil bent in silence, and moved as if she were about to retire: the wind and rain came dashing against the window. The companion of Mr St Lys, who was clad in a rough great coat, and was shaking the wet off an oilskin hat known by the name of a 'south-wester,' advanced and said to her, "It is but a squall, but a very severe one; I would recommend you to stay for a few minutes." 

She received this remark with courtesy but did not reply. 

"I think," continued the companion of Mr St Lys, "that this is not the first time also that we have met?" 

"I cannot recall our meeting before," said Sybil. 

"And yet it was not many days past; though the sky was so very different, that it would almost make one believe it was in another land and another clime." 

Sybil looked at him as if for explanation. 

"It was at Marney Abbey," said the companion of Mr St Lys. 

"I was there; and I remember, when about to rejoin my companions, they were not alone." 

"And you disappeared; very suddenly I thought: for I left the ruins almost at the same moment as your friends, yet I never saw any of you again." 

"We took our course; a very rugged one; you perhaps pursued a more even way." 

"Was it your first visit to Marney?" 

"My first and my last. There was no place I more desired to see; no place of which the vision made me so sad." 

"The glory has departed," said Egremont mournfully. 

"It is not that," said Sybil: "I was prepared for decay, but not for such absolute desecration. The Abbey seems a quarry for materials to repair farm-houses; and the nave a cattle gate. What people they must be--that family of sacrilege who hold these lands!" 

"Hem!" said Egremont. "They certainly do not appear to have much feeling for ecclesiastical art." 

"And for little else, as we were told," said Sybil. "There was a fire at the Abbey farm the day we were there, and from all that reached us, it would appear the people were as little tendered as the Abbey walls." 

"They have some difficulty perhaps in employing their population in those parts." 

"You know the country?" 

"Not at all: I was travelling in the neighbourhood, and made a diversion for the sake of seeing an abbey of which I had heard so much." 

"Yes; it was the greatest of the Northern Houses. But they told me the people were most wretched round the Abbey; nor do I think there is any other cause for their misery, than the hard hearts of the family that have got the lands." 

"You feel deeply for the people!" said Egremont looking at her earnestly. 

Sybil returned him a glance expressive of some astonishment, and then said, "And do not you? Your presence here assures me of it." 

"I humbly follow one who would comfort the unhappy." 

"The charity of Mr St Lys is known to all." 

"And you--you too are a ministering angel." 

"There is no merit in my conduct, for there is no sacrifice. When I remember what this English people once was; the truest, the freest, and the bravest, the best-natured and the best-looking, the happiest and most religious race upon the surface of this globe; and think of them now, with all their crimes and all their slavish sufferings, their soured spirits and their stunted forms; their lives without enjoyment and their deaths without hope; I may well feel for them, even if I were not the daughter of their blood." 

And that blood mantled to her cheek as she ceased to speak, and her dark eye gleamed with emotion, and an expression of pride and courage hovered on her brow. Egremont caught her glance and withdrew his own; his heart was troubled. 

St Lys. who had been in conference with the weaver, left him and went to the bedside of his wife. Warner advanced to Sybil, and expressed his feelings for her father, his sense of her goodness. She, observing that the squall seemed to have ceased, bade him farewell, and calling Harold, quitted the chamber. 

Book 2 Chapter 15 

"Where have you been all the morning, Charles?" said Lord Marney coming into his brother's dressing-room a few minutes before dinner; "Arabella had made the nicest little riding party for you and Lady Joan, and you were to be found nowhere. If you go on in this way, there is no use of having affectionate relations, or anything else." 

"I have been walking about Mowbray. One should see a factory once in one's life." 

"I don't see the necessity," said Lord Marney; "I never saw one, and never intend. Though to be sure, when I hear the rents that Mowbray gets for his land in their neighbourhood, I must say I wish the worsted works had answered at Marney. And if it had not been for our poor dear father, they would." 

"Our family have always been against manufactories, railroads--everything," said Egremont. 

"Railroads are very good things, with high compensation," said Lord Marney; "and manufactories not so bad, with high rents; but, after all, these are enterprises for the canaille, and I hate them in my heart." 

"But they employ the people, George." 

"The people do not want employment; it is the greatest mistake in the world; all this employment is a stimulus to population. Never mind that; what I came in for, is to tell you that both Arabella and myself think you talk too much to Lady Maud." 

"I like her the best." 

"What has that to do with it my dear fellow? Business is business. Old Mowbray will make an elder son out of his elder daughter. The affair is settled; I know it from the best authority. Talking to Lady Maud is insanity. It is all the same for her as if Fitz-Warene had never died. And then that great event, which ought to be the foundation of your fortune, would be perfectly thrown away. Lady Maud, at the best, is nothing more than twenty thousand pounds and a fat living. Besides, she is engaged to that parson fellow, St Lys. 

"St Lys told me to-day that nothing would ever induce him to marry. He would practise celibacy, though he would not enjoin it." 

"Enjoin fiddle-stick! How came you to be talking to such a sanctified imposter; and, I believe, with all his fine phrases, a complete radical. I tell you what, Charles, you must really make way with Lady Joan. The grandfather has come to-day, the old Duke. Quite a family party. It looks so well. Never was such a golden opportunity. And you must be sharp too. That little Jermyn, with his brown eyes and his white hands, has not come down here, in the month of August, with no sport of any kind, for nothing." 

"I shall set Lady Firebrace at him." 

"She is quite your friend, and a very sensible woman too, Charles, and an ally not to be despised. Lady Joan has a very high opinion of her. There's the bell. Well, I shall tell Arabella that you mean to put up the steam, and Lady Firebrace shall keep Jermyn off. And perhaps it is as well you did not seem too eager at first. Mowbray Castle, my dear fellow, in spite of its manufactories, is not to be despised. And with a little firmness, you could keep the people out of your park. Mowbray could do it, only he has no pluck. He is afraid people would say he was the son of a footman." 

The Duke, who was the father of the Countess de Mowbray, was also lord lieutenant of the county. Although advanced in years, he was still extremely handsome; with the most winning manners; full of amenity and grace. He had been a roue in his youth, but seemed now the perfect representative of a benignant and virtuous old age. He was universally popular; admired by young men, adored by young ladies. Lord de Mowbray paid him the most distinguished consideration. It was genuine. However maliciously the origin of his own father might be represented, nobody could deprive him of that great fact, his father-in-law; a duke, a duke of a great house who had intermarried for generations with great houses, one of the old nobility, and something even loftier. 

The county of which his grace was Lord Lieutenant was very proud of its nobility; and certainly with Marney Abbey at one end, and Mowbray Castle at the other, it had just cause; but both these illustrious houses yielded in importance, though not in possessions, to the great peer who was the governor of the province. 

A French actress, clever as French actresses always are, had persuaded, once upon a time, an easy-tempered monarch of this realm, that the paternity of her coming babe was a distinction of which his majesty might be proud. His majesty did not much believe her; but he was a sensible man, and never disputed a point with a woman; so when the babe was born, and proved a boy, he christened him with his name; and elevated him to the peerage in his cradle by the title of Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine and Marquis of Gascony. 

An estate the royal father could not endow him with, for he had spent all his money, mortgaged all his resources, and was obliged to run in debt himself for the jewels of the rest of his mistresses; but he did his best for the young peer, as became an affectionate father or a fond lover. His majesty made him when he arrived at man's estate the hereditary keeper of a palace which he possessed in the north of England; and this secured his grace a castle and a park. He could wave his flag and kill his deer; and if he had only possessed an estate, he would have been as well off as if he had helped conquer the realm with King William, or plundered the church for King Harry. A revenue must however be found for the Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine, and it was furnished without the interference of Parliament, but with a financial dexterity worthy of that assembly--to whom and not to our sovereigns we are obliged for the public debt. The king granted the duke and his heirs for ever, a pension on the post-office, a light tax upon coals shipped to London, and a tithe of all the shrimps caught on the southern coast. This last source of revenue became in time, with the development of watering-places, extremely prolific. And so, what with the foreign courts and colonies for the younger sons, it was thus contrived very respectably to maintain the hereditary dignity of this great peer. 

The present Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine had supported the Reform Bill, but had been shocked by the Appropriation clause; very much admired Lord Stanley, and was apt to observe, that if that nobleman had been the leader of the conservative party, he hardly knew what he might not have done himself. But the duke was an old whig, had lived with old whigs all his life, feared revolution, but still more the necessity of taking his name out of Brookes', where he had looked in every day or night since he came of age. So, not approving of what was going on, yet not caring to desert his friends, he withdrew, as the phrase runs, from public life; that is to say, was rarely in his seat; did not continue to Lord Melbourne the proxy that had been entrusted to Lord Grey; and made tory magistrates in his county though a whig lord lieutenant. 

When forces were numbered, and speculations on the future indulged in by the Tadpoles and Tapers, the name of the Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine was mentioned with a knowing look and in a mysterious tone. Nothing more was necessary between Tadpole and Taper; but, if some hack in statu pupillari happened to be present at the conference, and the gentle novice greedy for party tattle, and full of admiring reverence for the two great hierophants of petty mysteries before him, ventured to intimate his anxiety for initiation, the secret was entrusted to him, "that all was right there; that his grace only watched his opportunity; that he was heartily sick of the present men; indeed, would have gone over with Lord Stanley in 1835, had he not had a fit of the gout, which prevented him from coming up from the north; and though to be sure his son and brother did vote against the speaker, still that was a mistake; if a letter had been sent, which was not written, they would have voted the other way, and perhaps Sir Robert might have been in at the present moment." 
